Basic Research

Single-Cell Transcriptomics of a Human Kidney Allograft Biopsy Specimen Defines a Diverse Inflammatory Response

Wu, Haojia ¹ ; Malone, Andrew F. ¹ ; Donnelly, Erinn L. ¹ ; Kirita,
Yuhei ¹ ; Uchimura, Kohei ¹ ; Ramakrishnan, Sai M. ¹ ; Gaut, Joseph P. ²
; Humphreys, Benjamin D. ^(1,3)

Author Information

¹ Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine and Departments of

² Pathology and Immunology and

³ Developmental Biology, Washington University in St. Louis School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri

H.W. and A.F.M. contributed equally to this work.

Correspondence: Dr. Benjamin D. Humphreys, Division of Nephrology,
Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, CB
8129, St. Louis, MO 63110. Email: humphreysbd@wustl.edu

Journal of the American Society of Nephrology 29(8):p 2069-2080, August
2018. | DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2018020125

-    Free
-    Infographic
-   [SDC]
-   [SDC]
-   [SDC]

Metrics

Abstract

Background Single-cell genomics techniques are revolutionizing our
ability to characterize complex tissues. By contrast, the techniques
used to analyze renal biopsy specimens have changed little over several
decades. We tested the hypothesis that single-cell RNA-sequencing can
comprehensively describe cell types and states in a human kidney biopsy
specimen.

Methods We generated 8746 single-cell transcriptomes from a healthy
adult kidney and a single kidney transplant biopsy core by single-cell
RNA-sequencing. Unsupervised clustering analysis of the biopsy specimen
was performed to identify 16 distinct cell types, including all of the
major immune cell types and most native kidney cell types, in this
biopsy specimen, for which the histologic read was mixed rejection.

Results Monocytes formed two subclusters representing a nonclassical
CD16+ group and a classic CD16− group expressing dendritic cell
maturation markers. The presence of both monocyte cell subtypes was
validated by staining of independent transplant biopsy specimens.
Comparison of healthy kidney epithelial transcriptomes with biopsy
specimen counterparts identified novel segment-specific proinflammatory
responses in rejection. Endothelial cells formed three distinct
subclusters: resting cells and two activated endothelial cell groups.
One activated endothelial cell group expressed Fc receptor pathway
activation and Ig internalization genes, consistent with the pathologic
diagnosis of antibody-mediated rejection. We mapped previously defined
genes that associate with rejection outcomes to single cell types and
generated a searchable online gene expression database.

Conclusions We present the first step toward incorporation of
single-cell transcriptomics into kidney biopsy specimen interpretation,
describe a heterogeneous immune response in mixed rejection, and provide
a searchable resource for the scientific community.

[Abstract]

Export

The renal biopsy provides critical diagnostic and prognostic
information, but interpretation rests on a limited number of techniques
perfected decades ago. With few exceptions, there have been no
substantive changes in the way that biopsies are read in 25 years.
Recent techniques for massively parallel single-cell RNA-sequencing
(scRNA-seq) have been developed, in which the expression of thousands of
genes in thousands of individual cells can be measured rapidly,
simultaneously, and quantitatively. These approaches offer an
unprecedented opportunity to define cell types and states
comprehensively with molecular precision. Several international efforts,
including the Kidney Precision Medicine Project, are underway using
these strategies and other tissue interrogation strategies to generate
kidney cellular expression atlases in health and disease. Recently, the
first comprehensive mouse scRNA-seq dataset was published. ^(¹)

Hurdles limit application of scRNA-seq to human kidney biopsies. ^(²)
Tissue availability is unpredictable, requiring access to equipment,
such as fluorescence-activated sorting machines, with little notice.
Additionally, the kidney biopsy consists of a very small sample of about
10×2 mm, but low-input samples pose challenges in scRNA-seq, which
relies on double-Poisson loading of cells and oligobearing beads,
leading to loss of 95% of cellular input, for example, with the DropSeq
approach. Despite these limitations, we hypothesized that scRNA-seq can
be successfully applied to a single human kidney biopsy and that doing
so would reveal novel insights about disease pathogenesis. Successful
application of scRNA-seq to human biopsies will enable evaluation of
this powerful tool as an adjunct to traditional renal biopsy
interpretation.

We chose to focus on renal allograft biopsies, because a substantial
body of data has already established bulk transcriptional profiling to
be predictive of outcomes in transplantation. These analyses, however,
are limited, because population-averaged measurements mask single-cell
transcriptomic heterogeneity, particularly with rare cell types.
Moreover, rejection in all of its forms involves the complex interaction
of many different immune and parenchymal cells. scRNA-seq is uniquely
well suited to dissecting a complex tissue into multiple cellular
subpopulations, because it can be easily scaled to tens of thousands of
cells. Longitudinal clinicopathologic studies, such as the DeKAF Study,
and bulk transcriptional analysis using microarrays suggest that
antibody-mediated immune injury is the most common driver of late
allograft loss. ^(^(3–5)) Our understanding of the molecular and
cellular mechanisms of rejection, in particular, antibody-mediated
rejection (ABMR), is poor. Analyses of allograft biopsy transcriptional
profiles by microarray have classified patterns of gene expression that
can define the different clinical phenotypes of allograft rejection ^(⁶)
^(,) ^(⁷) or predict the development of IFTA using biopsy tissue. ^(⁸)
^(,) ^(⁹) From these studies, a large number of genes have been
described that play a role in allograft rejection and failure. Whether
resolution of these bulk transcriptional profiles to individual cell
types might improve our understanding of rejection or provide for better
disease subclassification is unknown.

In this study, we present the first scRNA-seq analysis of a single human
kidney allograft biopsy. We used unsupervised computational approaches
to identify 16 different cell types and novel cell states within
endothelium. We compared tubular cell transcriptomes with healthy adult
kidney and thereby, identified proinflammatory parenchymal responses in
the rejecting kidney. We mapped genes with expression that is known to
associate with allograft pathologies to specific kidney cell types, in
many cases finding expression in unexpected cells. Our data prove the
feasibility of applying comprehensive scRNA-seq to human kidney biopsies
and identify complex immune cell infiltrates and proinflammatory
parenchymal responses.

Methods

Clinical Sample

The patient described in this study consented under the Washington
University Kidney Translational Research Core (WUKTRC) Institutional
Review Board protocol (identification 201102312). The donor and
recipient HLA haplotypes, the clinical biopsy Banff scores, and
follow-up clinical outcome data were received in a deidentified manner
through the WUKTRC. The healthy kidney tissue was from a discarded human
donor kidney where donor anonymity was preserved. The donor was a
70-year-old white man with a serum creatinine of 1.1 mg/dl.

Tissue Processing and Single-Cell Dissociation

The renal biopsy was minced into small pieces with a razor blade and
incubated at 37°C in freshly prepared dissociation buffer containing
0.25% trypsin and 40 U/ml DNase I. Dissociated cells were harvested
every 10 minutes by filtering the cell suspension through a 70- μ m cell
strainer (pluriSelect) into 10% FBS buffer on ice. The residual biopsy
tissue trapped on the cell strainer was dissociated once again with 1 ml
dissociation buffer for 10 minutes and passed through the cell strainer
into the same FBS buffer from the first collection. We repeated this
dissociation procedure three times until most of the tissue had been
dissociated into single cells (total dissociation time was 30 minutes).
Finally, cells were collected by centrifugation at 400× g for 5 minutes,
resuspended in inDrops cell suspension buffer (9% Optiprep), and
strained through a 40- μ m cell mesh (pluriSelect) to further remove
cell clumps and large fragments. Cell viability was approximately 90%
for the biopsy used in this study as assessed by Trypan Blue staining.

Single-Cell and Single-Nucleus InDrops and Bioinformatic Analysis

Information is in Supplemental Material .

Data Availability

All relevant data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus
under accession numbers GSE109564 and GSE114156.

Results

A clinically indicated kidney allograft biopsy was performed on a
21-year-old white man with ESRD secondary to hemolytic uremic syndrome.
He received a deceased donor kidney transplant 2 years prior (HLA
mismatch 1A, 2B, 1DR) with thymoglobulin induction ( Supplemental Table
1 ). At the time of the biopsy, his creatinine was 6.1 mg/dl, and it had
increased from a baseline of 1.2 mg/dl 4 months prior. Maintenance
immunosuppression was tacrolimus (trough levels 4–8 ng/ml), mycophenolic
acid, and prednisone. He failed to get laboratory testing in the 4
months before biopsy, raising suspicion of medication noncompliance.

The histologic diagnosis was acute T cell–mediated rejection with plasma
cells graded Banff 1B and acute C4d-negative ABMR ( Figure 1A ,
Supplemental Table 2 ). Donor-specific antibodies (DSAs) were positive
at the time of biopsy ( Supplemental Table 3 ). Treatment consisted of
high-dose corticosteroids (750 mg methylprednisone), thymoglobulin (3.5
mg/kg), IVIG (1 g/kg), and rituximab (200 mg). Allograft function did
not improve, and he returned to dialysis 2 months later.

[fig1]

Figure 1.:

Comprehensive single-cell RNA-sequencing of an allograft biopsy reveals
diverse kidney and immune cell types. (A) Four 16-mm biopsy cores were
subjected to cell dissociation. Cell yield varied between 44,000 and
75,000 cells, and viability was 88%–96%. (B) Biopsy A14 was used for
single-cell RNA-sequencing, and periodic acid–Schiff staining revealed
diffuse inflammatory infiltrates. (C) tSNE plot of cell clusters
identified on the basis of the expression of highly variable genes. (D)
Heat map of all cells clustered by recursive hierarchical clustering and
Louvain–Jaccard clustering (Seurat) showing selected marker genes for
each population. CD, collecting duct; EC, endothelial cell; LOH (AL),
loop of Henle, ascending limb; LOH (DL), loop of Henle, distal limb;
Mono, monocyte; PT, proximal tubule; tSNE, t-Distributed Stochastic
Neighbor Embedding.

scRNA-seq Identifies Kidney Allograft Biopsy Cell Types

In preliminary experiments, we used a 30-minute 0.25% trypsin cell
dissociation procedure to compare the cell yield and viability from four
human kidney biopsies. Biopsy length ranged from 10 to 15 mm, cell yield
ranged from 44,000 to 75,000 cells, and viability was between 88% and
96% ( Figure 1A ). We next assessed the ability of two common
droplet-based techniques, DropSeq ^(¹⁰) and inDrops, ^(¹¹) to generate
single-cell transcriptomes from human kidney ( Supplemental Figure 1 ).
We consistently failed to generate libraries using DropSeq lysis buffer
and beads, but we were successful using inDrops reagents ( Supplemental
Figure 1B ). Of note, the DropSeq lysis buffer includes the detergent
sarcosyl, whereas the inDrops lysis buffer includes NP40, suggesting the
possibility that incomplete cell lysis might explain our failure to
generate libraries using DropSeq.

We enzymatically dissociated one 16G biopsy core ( Figure 1B ) into a
single-cell suspension, performed droplet-based microfluidic cell
separation using InDrops, generated libraries, and sequenced the cells
to a read depth of approximately 50,000 reads per cell. A total of 4487
cells passed our quality filters. We detected, on average, 1481
transcripts from 827 different genes per cell. Unsupervised clustering
analysis using Seurat identified 16 distinct cell clusters ( Figure 1C
). A similar number of unique clusters were identified using an
independent clustering approach ^(¹²) ( Supplemental Figure 2 ). We
confirmed that there was no batch effect by projecting the cells from
different tubes onto the same tSNE ( Supplemental Figure 3 ).

We annotated clusters on the basis of anchor gene expression and the
literature. We independently validated the clusters by computing Pearson
correlation on averaged expression profiles derived from a recently
generated mouse P1 kidney scRNA-seq dataset and a PBMC dataset from a
healthy donor ( http://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell/datasets ) (
Figure 2A , Supplemental Figure 4A ). ^(¹³) We could, therefore,
confidently annotate four tubular cell types (38.0%), three leukocyte
populations (21.4%), four types of lymphocytes (19.8%), three stromal
cell types (8.2%), endothelial cells (ECs; 11.5%), and an actively
proliferating cell population (1.1%) ( Supplemental Figure 4B ). The
expression of unique marker genes in each cell population confirmed the
robustness of our cell type classification approach ( Figure 1D ). Full
lists of differentially expressed genes in each cluster are provided in
Supplemental Table 4 . A searchable database for this dataset, including
gene expression projected onto the tSNE diagram, is available at
http://humphreyslab.com/SingleCell/ .

[fig2]

Figure 2.:

Annotation of leukocyte subsets. (A) Heat map indicating Pearson
correlations of the averaged transcriptional profiles between human
PBMCs and leukocyte clusters from the kidney biopsy. (B) Ligand-receptor
pair expression according to cell type. Ligands are indicated in the
left panel, and receptors are indicated in the right panel. Straight
lines indicate ligand-receptor pairs. (C) The biopsy monocyte 1 cluster
is most similar to CD16+ peripheral blood monocytes on the basis of
average expression; however, these cells form different clusters on the
basis of tSNE, indicating that they are different cell types. (D) The
monocyte 1 cluster is differentiating toward an acquired dendritic cell
phenotype on the basis of expression of marker genes. (E) Violin plot
showing that FCGR3A (CD16) distinguishes monocyte 1 from monocyte 2,
whereas FCN1 is expressed in monocyte 2 but not monocyte 1. MSR1 is
expressed in both clusters. (F) Immunohistochemistry for FCGR3A or FCN1
on normal, mixed rejected, or pure antibody-mediated rejection (ABMR)
transplant kidney biopsies. Distinct monocyte 1 and 2 cell types can be
seen. Upper and lower panels are serial sections. Scale bar, 50 μ m. (G)
Immunofluorescence analysis of mixed rejection. FCN1+ cells (arrowheads)
and FCGR3A+ cells (arrows) are separate cell types. CD, collecting duct;
DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; EC, endothelial cell; LOH (AL),
loop of Henle, ascending limb; LOH (DL), loop of Henle, distal limb;
Mono, monocyte; PT, proximal tubule. Scale bar, 10 μ m.

Comparative Analysis Reveals Monocyte Cell-State Transition and Cell-Cell Interactions between Many Cell Types

Monocyte infiltration is quantitatively associated with kidney
dysfunction during allograft rejection. ^(¹⁴) ^(,) ^(¹⁵) By mapping our
dataset to a published single-cell PBMC dataset, ^(¹⁶) we identified two
distinct monocyte clusters ( Figure 2A ). Monocyte 1 strongly expressed
FCGR3A (CD16) and was most similar to CD16-positive, proinflammatory,
nonclassic monocytes. ^(¹⁷) Of note, CD16++ cells are strongly
associated with allograft rejection. ^(¹⁸) ^(,) ^(¹⁹)

Monocyte 2 seems to be a classic or intermediate monocyte population (
Figure 2A , Supplemental Table 4 ). Interestingly, ABCA1 , which
mediates sterol efflux in activated dendritic cells (DCs), ^(²⁰) ^(,)
^(²¹) was uniquely detected in monocyte 1 ( Figure 2D ), likely
indicating a phenotypic transition toward a DC fate by monocytes in
allograft rejection. In support of this interpretation, direct
comparison of monocyte 1 with the mono_CD16+_C1qa cluster from the PBMC
dataset revealed a clear separation of monocyte 1 and the PBMC
monocytes, although they were highly correlated on the basis of averaged
expression ( Figure 2C ). Although both cells clusters expressed typical
monocyte markers ( Figure 2D ), monocyte 1 from the biopsy dataset
highly expressed two receptors ( SDC3 and ABCA1 ) ( Figure 2D ) and a
panel of DC maturation markers, including APOE , ^(²²) PDE3A , IGKC ,
^(²³) LGMN , and i CD83 , ^(²⁴) suggesting differentiation into DC in
situ ( Figure 2D ).

We identified unique marker genes for each monocyte cluster ( Figure 2E
) and performed immunohistochemistry on independent transplant biopsies,
with histologic diagnoses of no disease, mixed rejection, or ABMR. There
was sparse interstitial staining for both the monocyte 1 marker (FCGR3A
or CD16) and the monocyte 2 marker (FCN1) in biopsies with no disease.
By contrast, there was strong staining for both monocyte subsets in
mixed rejection, with lesser infiltration in pure ABMR ( Figure 2F ,
Supplemental Figure 5 ). Costaining by immunofluorescence analysis
confirmed that the monocyte subtypes are separate populations ( Figure
2G ). The presence of these monocyte subsets in all six independent
biopsies with mixed rejection or ABMR validates the use of scRNA-seq to
identify novel cell types associated with kidney rejection.

Ligand-receptor analysis revealed expression of 14 receptors (excluding
collagens) for which we could detect expression of their cognate ligands
( Figure 2B ). These ligands were detected in all cell types,
emphasizing the integration of signals between multiple kidney and
leukocyte cell types. Pericytes, fibroblasts, and myofibroblasts
expressed the chemoki CXCL12 , which promotes lymphocyte and monocyte
chemotaxis through its cognate receptor CXCR4 , which itself is
expressed in T cells, monocytes, and mast cells in our dataset. Further
evidence for parenchymal cell regulation of the inflammatory response
comes from the observation that collecting duct epithelia express KITLG
, also known as stem cell factor, which binds the transmembrane receptor
encoded by KIT and is expressed on mast cells in the biopsy ( Figure 2B
). ^(²⁵) Stem cell factor promotes mast cell migration, adhesion,
proliferation, and survival. Mast cells transcripts correlate strongly
with allograft biopsy fibrosis. ^(²⁶) These results suggest the
unexpected hypothesis that collecting duct epithelia actively coordinate
mast cell infiltration during rejection. Consistent with an important
role for mast cells in kidney injury, a recent study showed that mast
cell ablation in the early phases of renal injury is sufficient to
reduce subsequent fibrosis by decreasing the inflammatory response.
^(²⁷) ^(,) ^(²⁸)

Activation of Epithelial, Endothelial, and Stromal Cells in Allograft Rejection

We next compared epithelial transcriptomes from the biopsy with their
healthy counterparts. Multiple attempts at scRNA-seq of healthy
nephrectomy tissue failed to generate libraries; however, we were
successful in generating adult human kidney single-nucleus
RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) data. We sequenced 4259 nuclei to a similar
depth as the biopsy and identified six distinct epithelial cell
clusters, including podocytes, proximal tubule, loop of Henle, distal
tubule, principal cells, and intercalated cells ( Figure 3, A–C ). The
absence of stromal or leukocyte populations presumably reflects either
dissociation bias and/or a cell frequency below our limit of detection.

[fig3]

Figure 3.:

Comparison of epithelia from single-cell RNA-sequencing of healthy adult
kidney with transplant biopsy reveals activated and proinflammatory cell
states. (A) Unsupervised clustering identified six distinct cell types
in human adult kidney. These types include three tubular cell types
(proximal tubule [PT], loop of Henle (LH), and distal tubule (DT), two
collecting duct (CD) cell populations principal cells (PC) and
intercalated cells (IC), and one podocyte population (P). (B) The heat
map showed that putative molecular signature marks the identity of each
cluster. (C) The violin plot further confirmed the clean expression of
well known cell type–specific markers in each cell population, which
makes it suitable for use in benchmarked comparison analysis. (D) tSNE
analysis of PT, loop of Henle (LOH), and CD cells from the allograft
biopsy and healthy adult human kidney cluster together indicating that
cell identity is maintained despite allograft inflammation. (E)
Collecting duct cells from the biopsy (CD-bx) coproject by tSNE onto the
collecting duct cluster from healthy kidney (CD-h). The same is true of
PT and LOH. (F) A dot plot comparing expression of terminal
differentiation or inflammatory genes in epithelial cells from the
biopsy or healthy kidney. (G) Ordering of healthy and activated PT cells
along pseudotime using Monocle. (H) Selected transcription factors that
are upregulated during PT activation. LOH-bx, loop of Henle from the
biopsy; LOH-h, loop of Henle from healthy kidney; PT-bx, proximal tubule
from the biopsy; PT-h, proximal tubule from healthy kidney.

Comparison of scRNA-seq and single-nucleus RNA-seq datasets has been
shown to be valid after normalizing to reduce method-specific
differences. ^(²⁹) Using a computational approach allowing for
integrated analysis of multiple datasets across techniques, ^(³⁰) we
compared proximal tubule, loop of Henle, and collecting duct cells from
our biopsy dataset with the same cell types from our healthy adult
kidney single-nucleus RNA-seq dataset. Unsupervised analysis of combined
cells from all six clusters (three healthy and three rejection) by tSNE
resulted in the expected three cell types, indicating that rejection did
not fundamentally alter tubular cell identity ( Figure 3D , Supplemental
Figure 6 ). Consistent with this interpretation, projecting the source
of cells onto this tSNE confirmed that healthy proximal tubule was
overlaid with rejecting proximal tubule as was loop of Henle and
collecting duct ( Figure 3E ).

Despite the overall similarity between healthy and rejecting proximal
tubule, loop of Henle, and collecting duct, differential gene analysis
revealed downregulation of terminal differentiation markers and
upregulation of proinflammatory genes in biopsy epithelia ( Figure 3F ).
The proximal tubule in particular expressed proinflammatory cytokine
genes, such as CXCL14 , which induces monocyte chemotaxis, and IL32 ,
which induces expression of TNF α by macrophages ( Figure 3F ). ITGB6 ,
a gene previously shown to be expressed in distal tubule of the diseased
kidney transplant, ^(³¹) was specifically induced in the loop of Henle
in our biopsy dataset. Within collecting duct epithelia, the top
statistically significant canonical signature by GSEA that distinguished
the biopsy collecting duct from the healthy collecting duct was the TGF-
β /BMP signaling signature ( Supplemental Figure 7 ). Collectively,
these results highlight the degree to which epithelial damage during
rejection amplifies proinflammatory and profibrotic responses.

To further investigate proximal tubule injury responses, we performed
cell trajectory analysis by reconstituting the healthy and biopsy
proximal tubule clusters by pseudotime analysis. We found a smooth
transition between healthy and activated proximal tubule cells ( Figure
3G and F ). We next asked what genes might be regulating proximal tubule
activation by plotting differentially expressed transcription factors
across pseudotime. Among others, we observed strong upregulation of
Sox9, which has recently been identified as a master regulator of
proximal tubule repair after injury, validating our approach. ^(³²)

Donor ECs are the primary targets of the recipients’ humoral immune
response in ABMR. Reclustering of the ECs revealed three separate cell
states in rejection ( Figure 4, A and B ). Differential gene expression
analysis suggested that the predominant EC cluster was in the resting
state, because it expressed EC markers ( PECAM1 , VWF , and ENG ) but no
transcripts previously associated with ABMR or angiogenesis ( Figure 4C
). We compared average gene expression of the three clusters with
healthy human brain and pancreas ECs, and the resting cluster correlated
best ( Figure 4D ). A smaller subcluster expressed the angiogenic
program, ^(³³) with several of these genes previously described in
association with ABMR ( Figure 4, C and E ) ^(³⁴) ^(,) ^(³⁵) A third EC
cluster expressed markers of endoplasmic stress (XBP1) and the cold
shock gene RBM3 , suggesting cell stress and activation. This cluster
was also actively transcribing Ig, such as has been observed in vitro (
Figure 4C ). ^(³⁶) The src family kinases have been shown to be
activated on ingestion of IgG. Consistent with this, FYN is highly
expressed in this EC subcluster. ^(³⁷) Thus, these ECs maybe
internalizing bound IgG, consistent with DSA-EC binding in ABMR. Studies
have shown that this process occurs in EC via Fc receptor–mediated
phagocytosis. ^(³⁸) In line with this notion, our GO analysis data
showed that the top GO terms for this cluster were all related to
phagocytosis ( Supplemental Figure 8 ).

[fig4]

Figure 4.:

Analysis of endothelial cell (EC) subsets. (A) tSNE plot of endothelial
subclusters from the kidney biopsy. (B) Heat map showing selected marker
genes for the three EC subclusters. (C) Violin plots showing conserved
expression of endothelial markers across all three subclusters. The
genes SEMA3G , IGFBP3 , SERPINE2 , and AQP1 indicate activation of an
angiogenic program. A separate EC subcluster expresses Igs as well as
markers of endoplasmic reticulum stress (XBP1) and cold shock (RBM3).
(D) Pearson correlation of all three EC subsets shows best correlation
between the resting EC cluster and healthy brain or pancreas ECs. (E)
Markers of antibody-mediated rejection are detected in the angiogenic
cluster.

We identified three separate stromal clusters ( Supplemental Table 4 ).
Cluster 1 highly expresses RSG5 , a pericyte marker, ^(³⁹) as well as
CACNA1C , which is expressed in a pericyte pattern. Stromal cluster 2
expresses MoxD1 , a gene upregulated in early kidney transplant biopsies
and associated with subsequent fibrosis. ^(⁴⁰) This cluster likely
represents a fibroblast cell type. The third stromal cluster uniquely
expressed COL8A1 and COL12A1 , two genes that we have previously shown
to be strongly upregulated in kidney myofibroblasts during fibrotic
injury, suggesting a myofibroblast identity for this cluster. ^(⁴¹) The
interstitial expression patterns for marker genes from each stromal
cluster are shown in Figure 5 .

[fig5]

Figure 5.:

Marker gene localization to independent stromal cell types. The
expression of known and new cell type discriminating genes. Violin plots
are shown adjacent to immunohistochemistry, which is from the Human
Protein Atlas ( https://www.proteinatlas.org/ ). Examples of pericyte-,
fibroblast-, and myofibroblast-specific marker genes are shown. In
addition, DCN and COL6A1 are expressed in both fibroblast and
myofibroblast populations, whereas SPARC , BGN , and COL6A2 are
expressed in all three stromal cell types.

Antigen Expression and Antibody Production

Because alloantigens play a central role in ABMR, we profiled the
expression of HLA transcripts. Appropriately, class 2HLA transcripts
were predominantly expressed in the antigen-presenting cell clusters (
Supplemental Figure 9A ). Seurat analysis of our biopsy revealed two
plasma cell clusters and one B cell cluster. The B cell cluster
expressed few Ig genes but did express genes involved in antigen
presentation ( CD86 ) and T cell regulation (indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase, IDO1 ), thus behaving like a naïve B cell. Plasma cell
clusters highly express Ig genes; however, cluster 1 was κ -chain
restricted, suggesting that these cells are monoclonal. Plasma cell
cluster 2 was not light-chain restricted, and it highly expressed both
κ - and λ -gene types ( Supplemental Figure 9B ). These clusters were
labeled plasma cells on the basis of the correlation with a PBMC
reference dataset; however, these cells could also represent mature B
cells.

Reassessing the Molecular Signature for Disease Classification at the Single-Cell Level

We next assigned expression of genes previously associated with
allograft pathologies to single-cell types. ^(⁴²) When we mapped
putative EC-associated transcripts, we found that most of these genes
were actually not specifically expressed in ECs. Some of them were even
uniquely expressed in non-EC types, such as ENPEP (PT), ANGPT1
(fibroblast), MGP (myofibroblast), and FOSB (mast cells) ( Figure 6A ).
Over one half of the transcripts were expressed in multiple cell types.
Whether disease outcome correlates best with expression of these genes
in one cell type and not others will require further investigation. By
contrast, the 30 genes with expression that is associated with T
cell–mediated rejection are predominantly expressed in immune cell
types, with the majority expressed in T cells and almost no expression
in kidney parenchyma ( Figure 6B ). ^(⁴³) Finally, most of the
transcripts reported to be enriched in ABMR biopsies ^(³⁵) were mainly
detected in the EC cluster in our biopsy dataset ( Figure 6C ),
substantiating the critical role of endothelium in the pathogenesis of
ABMR. ^(⁴⁴)

[fig6]

Figure 6.:

Mapping cell type expression of genes previously associated with kidney
allograft pathology. (A) Expression of 35 endothelial cell
(EC)–associated genes identified in bulk transcriptional profiling
assigned to individual biopsy cell types (likelihood ratio test). A heat
map was used to visualize the z score–normalized average gene expression
of the candidate genes for each cell cluster identified from the biopsy
dataset. A majority of EC-associated transcripts are not expressed in
ECs. (B) A similar analysis performed on transcripts associated with T
cell–mediated rejection reveals that nearly all of them are expressed in
leukocytes and that the majority are expressed in T cells. (C) A similar
analysis on transcripts associated with antibody-mediated rejection
reveals that most of the genes were expressed in EC clusters. CD,
collecting duct; LOH (AL), loop of Henle, ascending limb; LOH (DL), loop
of Henle, distal limb; Mono, monocyte; PT, proximal tubule.

Discussion

This study establishes the feasibility of using scRNA-seq to
comprehensively measure gene expression from thousands of cells from a
single human kidney biopsy. We were able to identify 16 separate cell
types from just under 5000 single-cell libraries. We are confident that
future improvements of our basic workflow will enable the generation of
ten times as many single-cell libraries from a single human biopsy,
which should allow for much finer cell type separation and deeper
transcript detection. Our experience suggests that standard DropSeq
approaches are poorly suited for this application, however, potentially
due to incomplete cell lysis as well as inefficient cell capture rates.
By contrast, InDrops, as we used here, or the 10× Chromium system are
much better suited to analyze single human kidney biopsy.

Our study is limited to a single biopsy, and therefore, results cannot
be generalized. However, our findings do reveal several novel insights
into human allograft rejection. Anti-HLA antibodies are known to play
important roles in rejection, with much attention focused on EC
responses to antibody binding. Previous studies suggest that antibody
binding causes a number of EC responses, including cell proliferation,
^(^(45–48)) induction of secondary factors ( FGFR and VEGF ), ^(⁴⁹) ^(,)
^(⁵⁰) and leukocyte recruitment (including vWF and P-selectin
expression), ^(^(51–53)) as well as cell survival responses. Our data
show two distinct pathologic EC responses in mixed rejection: a resting
state and two ABMR response states consisting of an angiogenic state or
an Ig phagocytosis state. The resting-state cells probably elicit the
initial humoral response, because they express donor-specific HLA and
leukocyte adhesion molecules ( PECAM1 ). Evaluating the EC responses to
different antibodies in the setting of ABMR will help us better
understand why DSAs confer variable degrees of pathogenicity.
Therapeutically, the B cell-plasma cell lineage is an attractive target
for therapy, because inhibition of alloantibody production will likely
improve outcomes in ABMR. To this end, we identified B cells that are
likely naïve, polyclonal plasma cells (or mature B cells), and a
monoclonal plasma cell cluster representing the spectrum of
antibody-producing cells.

We have additionally provided the first single-nucleus RNA-seq dataset
from healthy adult human kidney. The reasons for our failure to generate
scRNA-seq libraries from healthy adult kidney compared with our success
with a diseased transplant biopsy are unclear. We speculate that the
robust inflammation present in the transplant biopsy made the tissue
more amenable to dissociation. However, this points to a major current
challenge and limitation in the application of single-cell technologies
to human kidney—the difficulty of successful dissociation without RNA
degradation and the associated problem of dissociation bias. For
example, we could not identify podocytes in the transplant biopsy,
whereas they were present in the healthy kidney single-nucleus dataset,
although similar numbers of cells/nuclei were analyzed. However, the
healthy human kidney dataset contained only epithelial cell types
without stroma, endothelium, or leukocytes. These striking differences
indicate that dissociation methods selectively enrich for certain cell
types, while losing others—either because they die during dissociation
or because they remain in clumps. Clearly, future work is needed to
define the optimal cell/nucleus dissociation approach for human kidney.
It is worth considering that nuclear dissociation can be carried out
entirely on ice—which eliminates the artefactual transcriptional stress
responses that are known to arise on incubation of kidney tissue with
proteases at 37°C. ^(¹³)

An additional important consideration is that information concerning
cell positioning is lost with scRNA-seq. Such information may be
critical to properly interpret results. For example, a ligand-receptor
analysis between podocytes and intercalated cells does not make sense
biologically, because they are positioned so far apart, whereas the same
comparison between principle cells and intercalated cells is
biologically meaningful. New experimental and computational tools are in
development to address the loss of spatial context with scRNA-seq. One
approach, fluorescent in situ sequencing, ^(⁵⁴) allows for genome-wide
expression profiling in fixed tissues—preserving tissue architecture for
RNA localization studies. In addition, computational approaches can
integrate scRNA-seq data with in situ hybridization RNA expression
patterns, allowing inference of spatial expression patterns by virtual
in situ hybridization. ^(⁵⁵)

Despite current challenges, we envision a time in the future when kidney
biopsies are routinely sent for scRNA-seq as part of a molecular
diagnostic workup. scRNA-seq can unmask the transcriptional
heterogeneity that is hidden in population-averaged measurements. We
illustrate the power of this approach by analyzing paracrine signaling
pathways between infiltrating leukocytes and kidney parenchyma and by
mapping predictive gene expression to single-cell types. We expect that
application of scRNA-seq technologies to human native and allograft
biopsies will ultimately generate clinically useful datasets to improve
diagnostic and prognostic accuracy, enable disease subphenotyping, and
accelerate adoption of molecular biopsy interpretation.

Disclosures

None.

Published online ahead of print. Publication date available at
www.jasn.org .

See related perspective, “Single-Cell Sequencing the Glomerulus,
Unraveling the Molecular Programs of Glomerular Filtration, One Cell at
a Time,” on pages .

This article contains supplemental material online at
http://jasn.asnjournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1681/ASN.2018020125/-/DCSupplemental
.

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health/National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) grant
DK107374 (to B.D.H.), grant 173970 (to B.D.H.) from the Chan Zuckerberg
Initiative, NIDDK Diabetic Complications Consortium ( www.diacomp.org )
grants DK076169 (to B.D.H.) and DK115255 (to B.D.H.), and The Keller
Family Fund at the Foundation for Barnes-Jewish Hospital (B.D.H.).

References

1. Park J, Shrestha R, Qiu C, Kondo A, Huang S, Werth M, et al.:
Single-cell transcriptomics of the mouse kidney reveals potential
cellular targets of kidney disease [published online ahead of print
April 5, 2018]. Science doi:10.1126/science.aar213129622724

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

2. Malone AF, Wu H, Humphreys BD: Bringing renal biopsy interpretation
into the molecular age with single-cell RNA sequencing. Semin Nephrol
38: 31–39, 201829291760

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

3. Sellarés J, de Freitas DG, Mengel M, Reeve J, Einecke G, Sis B, et
al.: Understanding the causes of kidney transplant failure: The dominant
role of antibody-mediated rejection and nonadherence. Am J Transplant
12: 388–399, 201222081892

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

4. El-Zoghby ZM, Stegall MD, Lager DJ, Kremers WK, Amer H, Gloor JM, et
al.: Identifying specific causes of kidney allograft loss. Am J
Transplant 9: 527–535, 200919191769

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

5. Gaston RS, Cecka JM, Kasiske BL, Fieberg AM, Leduc R, Cosio FC, et
al.: Evidence for antibody-mediated injury as a major determinant of
late kidney allograft failure. Transplantation 90: 68–74, 201020463643

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

6. Halloran PF, Pereira AB, Chang J, Matas A, Picton M, De Freitas D, et
al.: Potential impact of microarray diagnosis of T cell-mediated
rejection in kidney transplants: The INTERCOM study. Am J Transplant 13:
2352–2363, 201323915426

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

7. Halloran PF, Pereira AB, Chang J, Matas A, Picton M, De Freitas D, et
al.: Microarray diagnosis of antibody-mediated rejection in kidney
transplant biopsies: An international prospective study (INTERCOM). Am J
Transplant 13: 2865–2874, 201324119109

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

8. O’Connell PJ, Zhang W, Menon MC, Yi Z, Schröppel B, Gallon L, et al.:
Biopsy transcriptome expression profiling to identify kidney transplants
at risk of chronic injury: A multicentre, prospective study. Lancet 388:
983–993, 201627452608

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

9. Modena BD, Kurian SM, Gaber LW, Waalen J, Su AI, Gelbart T, et al.:
Gene expression in biopsies of acute rejection and interstitial
fibrosis/tubular atrophy reveals highly shared mechanisms that correlate
with worse long-term outcomes. Am J Transplant 16: 1982–1998,
201626990570

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

10. Macosko EZ, Basu A, Satija R, Nemesh J, Shekhar K, Goldman M, et
al.: Highly parallel genome-wide expression profiling of individual
cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell 161: 1202–1214, 201526000488

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

11. Klein AM, Mazutis L, Akartuna I, Tallapragada N, Veres A, Li V, et
al.: Droplet barcoding for single-cell transcriptomics applied to
embryonic stem cells. Cell 161: 1187–1201, 201526000487

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

12. Kiselev VY, Kirschner K, Schaub MT, Andrews T, Yiu A, Chandra T, et
al.: SC3: Consensus clustering of single-cell RNA-seq data. Nat Methods
14: 483–486, 201728346451

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

13. Adam M, Potter AS, Potter SS: Psychrophilic proteases dramatically
reduce single-cell RNA-seq artifacts: A molecular atlas of kidney
development. Development 144: 3625–3632, 201728851704

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

14. Mannon RB: Macrophages: Contributors to allograft dysfunction,
repair, or innocent bystanders? Curr Opin Organ Transplant 17: 20–25,
201222157320

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

15. Girlanda R, Kleiner DE, Duan Z, Ford EA, Wright EC, Mannon RB, et
al.: Monocyte infiltration and kidney allograft dysfunction during acute
rejection. Am J Transplant 8: 600–607, 200818294156

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

16. Zheng GX, Terry JM, Belgrader P, Ryvkin P, Bent ZW, Wilson R, et
al.: Massively parallel digital transcriptional profiling of single
cells. Nat Commun 8: 14049, 201728091601

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

17. Ziegler-Heitbrock L, Ancuta P, Crowe S, Dalod M, Grau V, Hart DN, et
al.: Nomenclature of monocytes and dendritic cells in blood. Blood 116:
e74–e80, 201020628149

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

18. van den Bosch TPP, Hilbrands LB, Kraaijeveld R, Litjens NHR, Rezaee
F, Nieboer D, et al.: Pretransplant numbers of CD16 ⁺ monocytes as a
novel biomarker to predict acute rejection after kidney transplantation:
A pilot study. Am J Transplant 17: 2659–2667, 201728332287

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

19. Vereyken EJ, Kraaij MD, Baan CC, Rezaee F, Weimar W, Wood KJ, et
al.: A shift towards pro-inflammatory CD16+ monocyte subsets with
preserved cytokine production potential after kidney transplantation.
PLoS One 8: e70152, 201323922945

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

20. Westerterp M, Gautier EL, Ganda A, Molusky MM, Wang W, Fotakis P, et
al.: Cholesterol accumulation in dendritic cells links the inflammasome
to acquired immunity. Cell Metab 25: 1294–1304.e6, 2017

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

21. Castella B, Kopecka J, Sciancalepore P, Mandili G, Foglietta M,
Mitro N, et al.: The ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 regulates
phosphoantigen release and Vγ9Vδ2 T cell activation by dendritic cells.
Nat Commun 8: 15663, 201728580927

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

22. Stephens TA, Nikoopour E, Rider BJ, Leon-Ponte M, Chau TA,
Mikolajczak S, et al.: Dendritic cell differentiation induced by a
self-peptide derived from apolipoprotein E. J Immunol 181: 6859–6871,
200818981105

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

23. Worah K, Mathan TSM, Vu Manh TP, Keerthikumar S, Schreibelt G, Tel
J, et al.: Proteomics of human dendritic cell subsets reveals
subset-specific surface markers and differential inflammasome function.
Cell Rep 16: 2953–2966, 201627626665

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

24. Lechmann M, Berchtold S, Hauber J, Steinkasserer A: CD83 on
dendritic cells: More than just a marker for maturation. Trends Immunol
23: 273–275, 200212072358

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

25. Okayama Y, Kawakami T: Development, migration, and survival of mast
cells. Immunol Res 34: 97–115, 200616760571

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

26. Mengel M, Reeve J, Bunnag S, Einecke G, Sis B, Mueller T, et al.:
Molecular correlates of scarring in kidney transplants: The emergence of
mast cell transcripts. Am J Transplant 9: 169–178, 200918976290

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

27. Danelli L, Madjene LC, Madera-Salcedo I, Gautier G, Pacreau E, Ben
Mkaddem S, et al.: Early phase mast cell activation determines the
chronic outcome of renal ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Immunol 198:
2374–2382, 2017

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

28. Holdsworth SR, Summers SA: Role of mast cells in progressive renal
diseases. J Am Soc Nephrol 19: 2254–2261, 200818776124

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

29. Lake BB, Codeluppi S, Yung YC, Gao D, Chun J, Kharchenko PV, et al.:
A comparative strategy for single-nucleus and single-cell transcriptomes
confirms accuracy in predicted cell-type expression from nuclear RNA.
Sci Rep 7: 6031, 201728729663

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

30. Butler A, Hoffman P, Smibert P, Papalexi E, Satija R: Integrating
single-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions,
technologies, and species. Nat Biotechnol 36: 411–420, 201829608179

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

31. Trevillian P, Paul H, Millar E, Hibberd A, Agrez MV: Alpha(v)beta(6)
integrin expression in diseased and transplanted kidneys. Kidney Int 66:
1423–1433, 200415458435

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

32. Kumar S, Liu J, Pang P, Krautzberger AM, Reginensi A, Akiyama H, et
al.: Sox9 activation highlights a cellular pathway of renal repair in
the acutely injured mammalian kidney. Cell Rep 12: 1325–1338,
201526279573

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

33. Reinders ME, Rabelink TJ, Briscoe DM: Angiogenesis and endothelial
cell repair in renal disease and allograft rejection. J Am Soc Nephrol
17: 932–942, 200616481411

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

34. Sis B, Jhangri GS, Bunnag S, Allanach K, Kaplan B, Halloran PF:
Endothelial gene expression in kidney transplants with alloantibody
indicates antibody-mediated damage despite lack of C4d staining. Am J
Transplant 9: 2312–2323, 200919681822

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

35. Sellarés J, Reeve J, Loupy A, Mengel M, Sis B, Skene A, et al.:
Molecular diagnosis of antibody-mediated rejection in human kidney
transplants. Am J Transplant 13: 971–983, 201323414212

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

36. Zhao Y, Liu Y, Chen Z, Korteweg C, Gu J: Immunoglobulin g (IgG)
expression in human umbilical cord endothelial cells. J Histochem
Cytochem 59: 474–488, 201121430258

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

37. Majeed M, Caveggion E, Lowell CA, Berton G: Role of Src kinases and
Syk in Fcgamma receptor-mediated phagocytosis and phagosome-lysosome
fusion. J Leukoc Biol 70: 801–811, 200111698501

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

38. Goebl NA, Babbey CM, Datta-Mannan A, Witcher DR, Wroblewski VJ, Dunn
KW: Neonatal Fc receptor mediates internalization of Fc in transfected
human endothelial cells. Mol Biol Cell 19: 5490–5505, 200818843053

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

39. He L, Vanlandewijck M, Raschperger E, Andaloussi Mäe M, Jung B,
Lebouvier T, et al.: Analysis of the brain mural cell transcriptome. Sci
Rep 6: 35108, 201627725773

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

40. Wei C, Menon M, Zhang W, Woytovich C, Philippe N, He J, Murphy B,
Wei C: Genomic Analysis of Gene Expression in Human Kidney Transplants
Identifies Moxd1 as a Key Driver for Renal Fibrosis [abstract]. Am J
Transplant 2017 17(suppl 3). Available at:
http://atcmeetingabstracts.com/abstract/genomic-analysis-of-gene-expression-in-human-kidney-transplants-identifies-moxd1-as-a-key-driver-for-renal-fibrosis/
. Accessed May 21, 2018

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

41. Grgic I, Krautzberger AM, Hofmeister A, Lalli M, DiRocco DP, Fleig
SV, et al.: Translational profiles of medullary myofibroblasts during
kidney fibrosis. J Am Soc Nephrol 25: 1979–1990, 201424652793

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

42. Einecke G, Sis B, Reeve J, Mengel M, Campbell PM, Hidalgo LG, et
al.: Antibody-mediated microcirculation injury is the major cause of
late kidney transplant failure. Am J Transplant 9: 2520–2531,
200919843030

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

43. Venner JM, Famulski KS, Badr D, Hidalgo LG, Chang J, Halloran PF:
Molecular landscape of T cell-mediated rejection in human kidney
transplants: Prominence of CTLA4 and PD ligands. Am J Transplant 14:
2565–2576, 201425219326

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

44. Wang S, Zhang C, Wang J, Yang C, Xu M, Rong R, et al.: Endothelial
cells in antibody-mediated rejection of kidney transplantation:
Pathogenesis mechanisms and therapeutic implications. J Immunol Res
2017: 8746303, 201728255564

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

45. Coupel S, Leboeuf F, Boulday G, Soulillou JP, Charreau B: RhoA
activation mediates phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent
proliferation of human vascular endothelial cells: An alloimmune
mechanism of chronic allograft nephropathy. J Am Soc Nephrol 15:
2429–2439, 200415339992

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

46. Jin YP, Korin Y, Zhang X, Jindra PT, Rozengurt E, Reed EF: RNA
interference elucidates the role of focal adhesion kinase in HLA class
I-mediated focal adhesion complex formation and proliferation in human
endothelial cells. J Immunol 178: 7911–7922, 2007

-   Google Scholar

47. Jin YP, Jindra PT, Gong KW, Lepin EJ, Reed EF: Anti-HLA class I
antibodies activate endothelial cells and promote chronic rejection.
Transplantation 79[Suppl]: S19–S21, 200515699739

-   Google Scholar

48. Jindra PT, Jin YP, Rozengurt E, Reed EF: HLA class I
antibody-mediated endothelial cell proliferation via the mTOR pathway. J
Immunol 180: 2357–2366, 2008

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

49. Bieri M, Oroszlan M, Farkas A, Ligeti N, Bieri J, Mohacsi P:
Anti-HLA I antibodies induce VEGF production by endothelial cells, which
increases proliferation and paracellular permeability. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol 41: 2422–2430, 200919577661

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

50. Bian H, Harris PE, Reed EF: Ligation of HLA class I molecules on
smooth muscle cells with anti-HLA antibodies induces tyrosine
phosphorylation, fibroblast growth factor receptor expression and cell
proliferation. Int Immunol 10: 1315–1323, 19989786431

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

51. Lowenstein CJ, Morrell CN, Yamakuchi M: Regulation of Weibel-Palade
body exocytosis. Trends Cardiovasc Med 15: 302–308, 200516297768

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

52. Yamakuchi M, Kirkiles-Smith NC, Ferlito M, Cameron SJ, Bao C,
Fox-Talbot K, et al.: Antibody to human leukocyte antigen triggers
endothelial exocytosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104: 1301–1306,
200717229850

-   Google Scholar

53. Fishbein MC, Kobashigawa J: Biopsy-negative cardiac transplant
rejection: Etiology, diagnosis, and therapy. Curr Opin Cardiol 19:
166–169, 200415075746

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

54. Lee JH, Daugharthy ER, Scheiman J, Kalhor R, Ferrante TC, Terry R,
et al.: Fluorescent in situ sequencing (FISSEQ) of RNA for gene
expression profiling in intact cells and tissues. Nat Protoc 10:
442–458, 201525675209

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

55. Karaiskos N, Wahle P, Alles J, Boltengagen A, Ayoub S, Kipar C, et
al.: The Drosophila embryo at single-cell transcriptome resolution.
Science 358: 194–199, 201728860209

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

View full references list

Keywords:

kidney biopsy; rejection; transcriptional profiling

Copyright © 2018 by the American Society of Nephrology

View full article text
