Download PDF []

-   Article
-   Open access
-   Published: 02 March 2020

Single-cell analysis of human ovarian cortex identifies distinct cell populations but no oogonial stem cells

-   Magdalena Wagner ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6266-1248 ¹ ,
-   Masahito Yoshihara ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8915-9282 ² ,
-   Iyadh Douagi ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-3221-8667 ³ ^(nAff9) ,
-   Anastasios Damdimopoulos ⁴ ,
-   Sarita Panula ¹ ,
-   Sophie Petropoulos ^(1 , 5) ,
-   Haojiang Lu ¹ ,
-   Karin Pettersson ¹ ,
-   Kerstin Palm ^(1 , 6) ,
-   Shintaro Katayama ² ,
-   Outi Hovatta ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5395-3807 ¹ ,
-   Juha Kere ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1974-0271 ^(2 , 7) ,
-   Fredrik Lanner [] ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2771-7445 ^(1 , 8)
    ^(na1) &
-   …
-   Pauliina Damdimopoulou [] ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8458-0855 ¹
    ^(na1)

[] Show authors

Nature Communications volume 11 , Article number: 1147 ( 2020 ) Cite
this article

-   37k Accesses

-   191 Citations

-   390 Altmetric

-   Metrics details

Abstract

The human ovary orchestrates sex hormone production and undergoes
monthly structural changes to release mature oocytes. The outer lining
of the ovary (cortex) has a key role in defining fertility in women as
it harbors the ovarian reserve. It has been postulated that putative
oogonial stem cells exist in the ovarian cortex and that these can be
captured by DDX4 antibody isolation. Here, we report single-cell
transcriptomes and cell surface antigen profiles of over 24,000 cells
from high quality ovarian cortex samples from 21 patients. Our data
identify transcriptional profiles of six main cell types; oocytes,
granulosa cells, immune cells, endothelial cells, perivascular cells,
and stromal cells. Cells captured by DDX4 antibody are perivascular
cells, not oogonial stem cells. Our data do not support the existence of
germline stem cells in adult human ovaries, thereby reinforcing the
dogma of a limited ovarian reserve.

Similar content being viewed by others

[]

In-depth analysis of transcriptomes in ovarian cortical follicles from children and adults reveals interfollicular heterogeneity

Article Open access 21 August 2024

[]

Human theca arises from ovarian stroma and is comprised of three discrete subtypes

Article Open access 04 January 2023

[]

Dissecting the fate of Foxl2 -expressing cells in fetal ovary using lineage tracing and single-cell transcriptomics

Article Open access 27 December 2022

Introduction

The ovaries have two main functions: providing mature and
developmentally competent oocytes, and producing hormones to support the
female phenotype and pregnancy. In contrast to spermatozoa that are
continuously produced throughout adulthood, oocytes are formed already
during fetal life. In the female fetus, primordial germ cells (also
called fetal germ cells, FGCs) proliferate and migrate to the fetal
gonads where they become oogonia ¹ . Oogonia proliferate and form cysts
that are broken down by intersecting somatic cells into primordial
follicles where meiosis is initiated. The oocytes within the primordial
follicles remain dormant and arrested in the first meiotic division
until the re-activation of follicles in the postnatal ovary ^(2 , 3 , 4)
. The stock of dormant primordial follicles in the postnatal ovary,
which resides within the ~1 mm thick ovarian cortex (Fig. 1a ),
determines the fertile life span of the woman ^(5 , 6) . Upon
activation, they mature in the process called folliculogenesis while
migrating towards the inner part of the ovary, medulla (Fig. 1a )
^(4 , 7) . When the reserve of follicles is consumed, menopause
commences and the woman cannot naturally conceive anymore.

[figure 1]

a A representative ovary cross-section of a 26-year-old GRP showing the
thin cortex layer ( ∼ 1 mm, used for fertility preservation) harboring
clusters of small primordial follicles that form the ovarian reserve.
Beneath the cortex is the inner part of the ovary, medulla, with looser
connective tissue, denser vasculature, and larger growing follicles.
Yellow rectangle is enlarged to highlight the ovarian reserve composed
of primordial follicles resting in the cortex. One early growing
(primary) follicle is indicated (arrowhead). Red rectangle is enlarged
to highlight the more prominent vasculature in the medulla. Scale bars:
2 mm (overview), 250 µm (zoom-in). b Schematic representation of the
study. In total, ovarian cortical tissue from 16 GRPs (mean age 26y) and
five C-sec patients (mean age 34y) were used. Ovaries were trimmed upon
tissue receival to separate the cortex. Cortex was cut into pieces, and
the quality was assessed via general histology and viability of GRP
follicles was further confirmed with neutral red staining. The samples
were cryopreserved. Thawed ovarian cortex was enzymatically digested
into single-cell suspension, filtered, and subjected either uncultured
to single-cell transcriptome and surface proteome profiling using
10xGenomics technology and cell surface marker screening panel or
cultured under oogonial stem cell (OSC) conditions and subjected to
single-cell transcriptome analysis using Smart-seq2. In all assays,
cells were stained with DDX4 Ab in order to relate the findings to DDX4
Ab+ (suggested OSCs) and Ab− ovarian cell populations. In the final data
analysis, cortical cell populations were identified, related to cultured
DDX4 Ab+ and Ab− cells, and compared with cells in the inner part of
human ovaries ²¹ and fetal ovarian cell populations ²² . Expression of
key markers was validated with immunostainings, qPCR and RNA-FISH. Ab
antibody, C-sec cesarean section, GRP gender reassignment patient, qPCR
quantitative real-time PCR, RNA-FISH RNA-fluorescent in situ
hybridisation, scRNA-seq single-cell RNA-sequencing.

Full size image []

Fig. 1: Human ovary and study design.

Although it is well understood that the ovaries cease to function when
women enter menopause at the age 50 on average ^(6 , 8) , there are
reports suggesting that pre- and postmenopausal adult ovaries contain
stem cells capable of differentiating into various cell lineages and
even oocyte-like cells in vitro ^(9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13) . Oocyte
forming stem cells, or oogonial stem cells (OSCs), are the most
enigmatic and debated cell type in the ovarian cortex. They are
hypothesized to stem from FGCs and be capable of giving rise to new
oocytes ¹³ . These OSCs have been isolated from human ovarian tissue
using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and an antibody that
targets the C-terminal domain of DDX4 protein ¹⁴ . DDX4 (a.k.a. VASA) is
a cytoplasmic RNA helicase specifically expressed in the germline and
commonly used as a marker for germ cells including oocytes in adult
ovaries ^(15 , 16 , 17) . In contrast to all other types of germline
cells, OSCs are suggested to express DDX4 on their cell membrane
enabling the isolation via FACS ¹³ . Isolated OSCs were shown to express
germline markers (e.g., DAZL, PRDM1 , and IFITM3 ), proliferate in vitro
and give rise to oocytes in a xeno-transplantation model ¹³ . The
biological significance of these cells is poorly understood. In
addition, many laboratories have not been able to repeat these findings
and confirm the existence of OSCs ^(18 , 19 , 20) .

Recently, somatic cells from the inner part of human ovaries have been
characterized by single-cell sequencing ²¹ . Here, we complete the map
of cell types in human ovaries by providing an extensive
characterization of germ cells and somatic cells in the outer layer of
human ovaries, i.e., in the cortex. We use tissue samples provided by 21
patients with proven healthy follicles. Our results demonstrate six main
cell types, but cannot provide support to the existence of OSCs. This
data set will be a valuable tool for studying the role of specific cell
populations in ovarian biology, dissecting causes of infertility, and
developing assisted reproductive technologies or even contraceptives.

Results

Study setup

We performed single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) and surface marker
screening to determine transcriptomes and cell surface proteomes of
cells present in the ovarian cortex (Fig. 1b ). Tissue from altogether
21 cesarean section (C-sec, N = 5) and gender reassignment patients
(GRPs, N = 16) was used to have a comprehensive coverage of individuals
and commonly used donor types (Fig. 1b ). C-sec patients were proven
fertile, and had no conditions or treatments known to affect ovarian
function. GRPs were generally healthy and had no conditions known to
affect ovarian function. All GRPs had androgen therapy prior to surgery
for an average of 46 months (14–89 months).

In order to relate the findings to OSCs, we marked the cells with DDX4
antibodies (Ab) in all experiments; the single-cell mRNA sequencing
(scRNA-seq) experiments were done on uncultured, unsorted cells, and
sorted DDX4 Ab+ and Ab− cell fractions as well as on cultured, sorted
DDX4 Ab+ and Ab− cells. The surface marker screen included DDX4 Ab as an
additional marker. Data analysis included validation of markers by in
situ hybridization (RNA-FISH), quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and
immunostaining of ovarian samples, and merging the data with publicly
available data sets of cells in the inner part of human ovaries ²¹ as
well as fetal ovaries containing FGCs ²² .

Six main cell populations in the human ovarian cortex

Ovarian tissue obtained from one GRP (20y) and three C-sec patients
(28y, 32y, 36y) was used for unsorted single-cell profiling. The cortex
containing the primordial follicles was carefully separated from medulla
and processed to two independent libraries that were sequenced in
parallel. After quality control and filtering (see Methods), a total of
12,160 cells were available for cell type characterization. Unbiased
clustering and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP)
analysis revealed six main cell clusters and a similar contribution of
cells from GRP and C-sec patients to all clusters (Fig. 2a and
Supplementary Fig. 1a ). Cell type identities were assigned using gene
expression analysis (Fig. 2b , Supplementary Data 1 ). Distinct cell
types were revealed based on enriched gene expression profiles (Fig. 2c
). Signature genes were identified for each cell type and their
expression score is shown as violin plots (Fig. 2d ). The smallest
population expressed the typical oocyte markers GDF9, ZP3, FIGLA, and
OOSP2 (Fig. 2d , Supplementary Data 1 ). The immune cells expressed
tissue-resident immune cell markers (e.g., CD69 and ITGB2 ) as well as
mixed gene signatures of T-cells ( CD2 , CD3G , and CD8A ) and
antigen-presenting cells, such as CD14, HLA-DRA, B2M, and HLA-DQB1 .
Endothelial cells could be identified based on the expression of strong
endothelial markers such as VE-cadherin ( CDH5 ) and VWF . Granulosa
cells were identified based on the expression of typical granulosa cell
markers FOXL2 and anti-Müllerian hormone ( AMH ). Around 10% of ovarian
cortex cells were annotated as perivascular cells expressing MYH11,
MCAM, RGS5, RERGL , and TAGLN , with enriched gene signatures associated
with both pericytes and smooth muscle cells ²³ (Supplementary Data 1 ).
The majority of cells (83%) were broadly classified as stroma. There
were no striking differences in gene expression between stromal cells
but rather a shared expression of diverse mesodermal lineage markers
(e.g., PDGFRA and DCN ) and extracellular matrix proteins (e.g., COL1A1
and COL6A1 ) (Fig. 2d , Supplementary Data 1 ).

[figure 2]

Ovarian cortical cells from GRP and C-sec patients were sequenced on a
single-cell level and integrated with ovarian medulla cells. a After
quality control and filtration, 5715 GRP cells (black) and 6445 C-sec
cells (grey) were further analyzed. Non-hierarchical cluster analysis
revealed six main clusters, and both GRP and C-sec cells contributed to
all clusters to a similar extent. b Main cell cluster identities were
identified with the help of gene expression analysis. c Heatmap showing
enriched genes per cluster. Clusters were downsampled to max. 300 cells
per cluster for better visualization. d The color-coded violin plots
show the expression scores of signature genes. e UMAP of merged
scRNA-seq data of our unsorted ovarian cortex cells (grey) and the
publicly available scRNA-seq data set of antral follicles and pieces of
stroma picked from ovarian medulla (colored cells) ²¹ . Previous cluster
annotations of both data sets are maintained ²¹ . f Same UMAP as in e ,
showing the contribution of our cortex cells (colored) to previously
reported ovarian medulla clusters (grey). All identified cortical cell
clusters joined the medullary cell clusters except from the oocytes that
were unique to the cortex data set. The horizontal bars in violin plots
indicate median gene expression per cluster. C-sec Cesarean section
patient, CL cluster, G granulosa, GRP gender reassignment patient, I
immune, TC theca cell, O oocytes, UMAP uniform manifold approximation
and projection.

Full size image []

Fig. 2: Transcriptome analysis of unsorted ovarian cells.

In order to obtain a complete map of cell types in adult human ovaries
(Fig. 1a ), we integrated our data with the recently published
single-cell profiling of antral follicles and tissue fragments manually
selected from the inner part of human ovary ²¹ . Although oocytes could
not be detected in this data set ²¹ , most reported somatic cell types
overlapped with the cortex cell types identified here including immune
cells, perivascular (or smooth muscle) cells, and endothelial cells
(Fig. 2e, f ). Interestingly, the cortical granulosa cells clustered
separately from the various granulosa cell types found in the antral
follicles, whereas the theca/stroma cell cluster from the large antral
follicle overlapped with our cortical stroma cluster (Fig. 2e, f ).
Collectively, this merged cell map demonstrates that similar vasculature
and immune cell clusters can be found throughout ovaries; that there is
a close relationship between theca cells and the general stromal cells;
and that the granulosa cells are different in the cortical part of the
ovary harboring the primordial follicles compared with the inner part
containing growing antral follicles.

We next investigated the presence of OSCs in the cortex by studying the
expression of reported OSC markers ¹³ as well as germline stem cell and
pluripotency markers. The OSC markers DDX4, DAZL , and DPPA3 were found
in the oocytes only (Fig. 3a ), whereas IFITM3 was detected to a varying
extent in all cell types (Supplementary Fig. 1c ). We noted that there
were sporadic cells throughout the somatic types that expressed DDX4
hence possibly being OSCs (Fig. 3a, b ). We manually pooled these 15
cells to their own cluster, marked as ddx4*, which showed a similar DDX4
expression level to oocytes (Fig. 3b ) but no differential expression of
any other reported OSC markers ( DPPA3, DAZL, PRDM1 ¹³ ) , well-studied
germline and pluripotency ( POU5F1, NANOG, TFAP2C ) or oocyte marker (
GDF9, ZP3, OOSP2, FIGLA ) when compared with somatic cells not
expressing DDX4 (Fig. 3c and Supplementary Data 1 ). Highly expressed
genes in the ddx4* cluster (Supplementary Data 1 ) showed no association
with a distinct cell type but rather consisted of various abundantly
expressed genes in the cortex. This might indicate that DDX4 expression
in somatic cells is rather captured owing to intrinsic technical noise
or transcriptional bursting reflecting stochastic gene activation ²⁴ .

[figure 3]

Somatic ovarian cortical cells expressing DDX4 were manually pooled for
analysis of transcriptional profile. a Heatmap showing representative
marker genes of OSCs and pluripotent cells by cell cluster. b Feature
and violin plots highlighting all somatic cells expressing DDX4
transcript. Expression is mainly localized to the oocyte cluster (pink
circle in feature plot) and dispersedly in 15 cells from other clusters
(labeled with * for clarity). The 15 somatic cells expressing DDX4 were
manually selected to form their own cluster (ddx4* in violin plot). c
Violin plots displaying the expression scores of reported OSC marker
genes ( DPPA3, DAZL, PRDM1 ), germline and/or pluripotency-associated
genes ( POU5F1, NANOG, TFAP2C ) and oocyte marker genes ( GDF9, ZP3,
OOSP2, FIGLA) across all cell clusters. Ddx4* cluster does not show
differential expression of these markers. The horizontal bars in violin
plots indicate median gene expression per cluster. G granulosa,
I immune, O oocytes, UMAP uniform manifold approximation and projection.

Full size image []

Fig. 3: Analysis of DDX4 -expressing somatic cells of the ovarian
cortex.

DDX4 Ab+ ovarian cortical cells are perivascular cells

Although our data indicated that there are no DDX4 -expressing germline
stem cells in the human ovarian cortex, others have isolated such cells
using polyclonal Ab (ab13840, Abcam) targeting the C-terminal domain of
DDX4 protein ^(11 , 13 , 14 , 25) . We isolated DDX4 Ab-positive (DDX4
Ab+) and negative (DDX4 Ab−) cell populations using the same protocol
and tissue source as in the previous reports ^(13 , 14) . We first
confirmed that only the recommended DDX4 Ab is able to bind and isolate
cells from the ovarian cortex. The Abcam Ab bound to a small fraction of
ovarian cells (5–11.5%), whereas none of the other tested antibodies
against the C-terminal domain enriched any cells above the negative
controls (Supplementary Fig. 2a ). Using the Abcam Ab, we sorted DDX4
Ab+ and DDX4 Ab− cells from three GRPs (20y, 22y, 26y) (Supplementary
Fig. 2b ). After quality control and filtration, there were 5479 Ab+ and
6690 Ab− cells available for analysis (Supplementary Fig. 2c ). As the
fraction of DDX4 Ab+ cells in this experiment was 7.7% (Supplementary
Fig. 2b ), the isolation enriched the population by sevenfold. Seven
cell populations emerged from the two libraries (Fig. 4a , Supplementary
Fig. 2c ). Based on analysis of highly expressed genes (Supplementary
Data 2 ), the same cell types were identified in this combined data set
as in unsorted ovarian cortical cells with the exception of immune
cells, which were now separated to T-cells and monocytes (Fig. 4b ,
Supplementary Fig. 2c, d ). The majority (82.5%) of the DDX4 Ab+ cells
contributed to a specific cell cluster, which was identified as
perivascular cells (Fig. 4a, b and Supplementary Data 2 ). When
considering the sevenfold enrichment of Ab+ cells, the DDX4 Ab− cells
dominated all other clusters (Fig. 4a, b and Supplementary Fig. 2c ).
The top 25 highly expressed genes in Ab+ cells included several known
perivascular marker genes such as MCAM, TAGLN, and ACTA2 . The top 25
highly expressed genes in the Ab− cells included stromal cell markers,
such as DCN and PDGFRA (Supplementary Data 2 ). Among the perivascular
cell cluster, only one cell expressed DDX4 (Fig. 4c , left). In the
whole data set, there were two cells in the DDX4 Ab+ and 23 cells in the
DDX4 Ab− fractions that expressed DDX4 mRNA (Fig. 4c , right). Thirteen
of these were oocytes. The somatic DDX4 -expressing cells were pooled
(ddx4*, 1 DDX4 Ab+ cell, 11 DDX4 Ab− cells, Supplementary Fig. 2e ).
Ddx4* cells did not express any germline marker except for IFITM3 ,
which was in fact expressed in the majority of the ovarian cortex cells
(Supplementary Fig. 2f, g ). Ddx4* cells did not express any
pluripotency or oocyte markers either (Supplementary Fig. 2g and
Supplementary Data 2 ).

[figure 4]

Ovarian cortex cells were sorted into DDX4 Ab+ or Ab− populations and
sequenced on a single-cell level. a After quality control and
filtration, 5479 of Ab+ and 6690 of Ab− cells were available for
downstream analysis. Non-hierarchical cluster analysis revealed that
82.5% of the DDX4 Ab+ cells form a distinct cluster while all other
clusters mainly consisted of DDX4 Ab− cells. b Differential gene
expression analysis revealed seven main cell types. DDX4 Ab− cells
mainly contributed to stroma, endothelial cells, granulosa cells,
T-cells, monocytes, and oocytes. DDX4 Ab+ cells made up the cluster
identified as perivascular cells. c Violin plot showing the expression
of DDX4 among the different clusters (left) as well as among the sorted
Ab+ and Ab− populations (right). d Comparison of sorted scRNA-seq data
to single-cell transcriptome analysis of cultured DDX4 Ab+ and Ab−
ovarian cells. Top 25 upregulated genes of cultured DDX4 Ab+ and Ab−
cells were superimposed as expression score on to our uncultured
sequenced DDX4 Ab+ and Ab− cells. The upregulated genes from cultured
DDX4 Ab+ cells (scale bar depicting low expression in grey and high
expression in red) are highly expressed in the perivascular and
endothelial clusters, whereas the upregulated genes in cultured DDX4 Ab−
cells (scale bar depicting low expression in grey and high expression in
blue) are not found in these clusters. UMAP uniform manifold
approximation and projection.

Full size image []

Fig. 4: Transcriptome analysis of sorted DDX4 Ab+ and Ab− ovarian cortex
cells.

OSCs are usually cultured and expanded in vitro under specific
conditions ^(13 , 14) , which could enrich a stem cell population that
might go otherwise unnoticed. Therefore, we performed scRNA-seq on
FACS-sorted DDX4 Ab+ and Ab− cells cultured under OSC conditions for
several weeks. Even after culture, Ab+ and Ab− cells clearly clustered
separately (Supplementary Fig. 2h ). Highly expressed genes were
compared with our uncultured, FACS-sorted ovarian cells. The top 25
upregulated genes in the cultured DDX4 Ab+ cells associated with the
perivascular and endothelial cell clusters, whereas the top 25
upregulated genes in the cultured DDX4 Ab− cells did not (Fig. 4d and
Supplementary Data 3 ). The same results were obtained when the top
genes were overlaid with our uncultured, unsorted ovarian cells
(Supplementary Fig. 2i ). This suggested that in vitro culture does not
change the identity of the DDX4 Ab+ cells.

We next wanted to verify the localization of DDX4 Ab signal to
perivascular cells in the human ovarian cortex. We chose two highly
expressed markers from the perivascular cluster, MCAM and RGS5 (Fig. 5a
), and carried out a co-staining with DDX4. DDX4 was found to be
co-expressed with MCAM and RGS5 in the perivascular cells surrounding
CD31-positive endothelial cells of blood vessels (Fig. 5b ). In the same
tissue section, oocytes within pre-antral follicles stained brightly for
the DDX4 antibody but not for the perivascular markers (Fig. 5b last
column, asterisks). Accordingly, DDX4 transcript was localized via
RNA-FISH to the cytoplasm of oocytes only but not to somatic cells
including perivascular cells of the ovarian cortex (Fig. 5c ). These
results suggested that the Abcam DDX4 Ab binds to an epitope on
perivascular cells, which do not express DDX4 transcript.

[figure 5]

a Feature plots displaying expression of MCAM (green) and RGS5 (red),
both found among top highly expressed genes in DDX4 Ab+ cells, and their
co-expression (yellow) on a transcriptional level. Both markers are
highly expressed in cells of the perivascular cluster. Scale depicting
low expression in dark blue and high expression in green, red, and
yellow. b Immunostaining of human ovarian tissue sections with MCAM and
RGS5, co-stained with the endothelial marker CD31, showed a distinct
staining of cells surrounding endothelial cells of blood vessels. In a
consecutive section, MCAM is co-expressed in DDX4 Ab+ cells. Oocytes
staining brightly positive for DDX4 Ab+ are marked with white asterisks.
As negative control, primary antibodies were omitted. DAPI (blue) was
used as nuclear counterstain. Orange rectangles in last column (scale
bars: 200 µm) demarcate the zoomed-in area (scale bars: 50 µm). Staining
results were screened in three histological sections from two patients
and a representative image is shown; all visible vessels or follicles
were stained positive for MCAM/RGS5/DDX4 or DDX4 only, respectively. c
RNA-FISH on ovarian cortex sections from a GRP donor showing the
localization of DDX4 transcript in oocytes but not in blood vessel
cells. Red rectangles are demarcating the zoomed-in areas containing
follicles (F) or blood vessels (V) further highlighted with white dashed
circles or lines, respectively. Nuclei were counterstained using Hoechst
(blue). Positive control shows expression of Ubiquitin C. As negative
control, probes targeting the bacterial DabB gene were used. Scale bars:
200 µm (zoomed-out), 100 µm (zoomed-in). RNA-FISH was performed on three
histological sections of three donors, respectively, and representative
images are shown. NC negative control, PC positive control.

Full size image []

Fig. 5: Validation of perivascular localization of DDX4 Ab signal.

Distinct surface marker profile on DDX4 Ab+ cells

In order to study the identity of the DDX4 Ab+ cells using an
independent approach, we carried out an extensive human cell surface
marker profiling of ovarian cells co-stained with DDX4. Forty-three of
the 242 surface markers present in the screen were found to be
consistently expressed on ovarian cortex cells (Fig. 6a and
Supplementary Tables 1 – 3 ). Of these, seven (CD9; CD39; CD44; CD49a;
CD49c; CD144; and CD146, also known as MCAM) were brightly expressed on
DDX4 Ab+ cells when compared with the DDX4 Ab− cell population, whereas
seven (CD26; CD49e; CD54; CD55; CD62e; CD105; CD200) were weakly
expressed on DDX4 Ab+ cells (Fig. 6a ). Both positive and negative
surface marker sets were used to generate expression scores and
visualized in feature plots to associate them to cell clusters in our
scRNA-seq data sets. Markers expressed on DDX4 Ab+ cells were again
associated to the perivascular and endothelial cell clusters, whereas
the surface markers absent from DDX4 Ab+ cells were not (Fig. 6b ).

[figure 6]

The surface of ovarian tissue cells was screened for the expression of
242 CD markers by flow cytometry. a Dot plot showing the log median
fluorescence intensity (MFI, x axis) and the percentage of CD-positive
cells ( y axis) for those 43 CD markers that were repeatedly found to be
present on ovarian tissue cells (left, CD marker expression values of
repeat number three are shown as representatives). When co-stained with
DDX4 Ab, seven of the markers were highly expressed (red) and seven were
absent or lowly expressed (blue) on DDX4 Ab+ cells when compared with
the DDX4 Ab− cell population. Co-expression of DDX4 and the 14 markers
identified as high or low in DDX4 Ab+ cells is shown in representative
contour plots (right). X axes display intensity of DDX4 Ab signal, y
axes display intensity of CD marker signal. b Feature plots showing
expression scores of the seven cell surface markers highly expressed in
DDX4 Ab+ cells (scale bar depicting low expression in grey and high
expression in red) and the seven markers lowly expressed in DDX4 Ab+
cells (scale bar depicting low expression in grey and high expression in
blue) overlaid with our sorted scRNA-seq data. While markers that were
found to be highly expressed in DDX4 Ab+ cells on a protein level are
mainly expressed in perivascular cluster, CD markers lowly expressed in
DDX4 Ab+ cells show a more disperse expression pattern. c FACS dot plots
showing the co-expression of MCAM and CD9, two markers brightly
expressed on DDX4 Ab+ cells, in regard to DDX4 Ab+ and Ab− cell
populations. Around 3.67% of ovarian cortex cells were double positive
for MCAM and CD9 (in red) and 5.48% are DDX4 Ab+. Around 80% of MCAM/CD9
double positive cells co-stained with DDX4 Ab (2.94% of MCAM ⁺ /CD9 ⁺
/DDX4 ⁺ cells in total). Flow analysis was repeated in two independent
experiments. d Unfiltered lysate of ovarian cortex cells cytospinned and
stained for MCAM (green), CD9 (red), and DDX4 (magenta) showing
co-expression of all three markers on blood vessels. As negative
control, primary antibodies were omitted. DAPI (blue) was used as
nuclear counterstain. Scale bars: 50 µm. Immunostaining was performed in
duplicates in two independent experiments and a representative image is
shown. All visible vessels stained positive for MCAM/CD9/DDX4. FACS
fluorescence-activated cell sorting, MFI median fluorescence intensity,
NC negative control, UMAP uniform manifold approximation and projection.

Full size image []

Fig. 6: Screening of ovarian cortex cells for surface proteins.

Markers of DDX4 Ab+ cells identified in the surface marker screen (MCAM
and CD9, Fig. 6a ) and scRNA-seq analysis ( MCAM, CD9 , and TAGLN ,
Supplementary Data 2 ), were validated via immunostaining to localize to
small and large blood vessels in the cortex (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b ).
The gene expression of MCAM and TAGLN was further validated by qPCR to
be enriched in the DDX4 Ab+ cell population when compared to the DDX4
Ab− fraction and bulk ovarian tissue cells (Supplementary Fig. 3c ).

We next studied the extent to which DDX4 Ab stained perivascular cells.
Altogether, 3.67% of the ovarian cells were double positive for the
perivascular markers MCAM/CD9, and 80% of them were found to be also
positive to DDX4 leading to 2.94% of live cells in the ovarian cortex
being MCAM ⁺ /CD9 ⁺ /DDX4 ⁺ (Fig. 6c ). Immunostaining of unfiltered
digested ovarian cortex cells likewise showed that all cells of a blood
vessel were positive for DDX4 Ab with most of them also co-expressing
MCAM and/or CD9 (Fig. 6d ). These data collectively suggest that the
majority of vascular cells are immunopositive for the DDX4 Ab while not
expressing DDX4 transcript.

No detection of germline stem cells in the ovarian cortex

To further investigate the possible existence of germline stem cells in
the ovarian cortex, regardless of immunopositivity for DDX4 Ab, we
compared our data to a recently reported data set of human fetal ovaries
consisting of single-cell transcriptomes of FGCs and somatic cells ²² .
In these data, FGCs were classified into mitotic FGCs, retinoic acid
(RA) responsive FGCs, meiotic FGCs, and oogonia, whereas granulosa cells
were divided into week 7–10, week 10–20, and week 20–26 granulosa cells
²² . Owing to a bias caused by differences in cell numbers between the
data sets (1123 fetal cells in ²² vs. 24,329 adult cells in our data),
fetal sequencing data were integrated with the individual adult
scRNA-seq data sets, resulting in four separate analyses (fetal/C-Sec,
fetal/GRP, fetal/DDX4 Ab+, and fetal/DDX4 Ab−) all yielding similar
results. A representative data set (fetal/C-Sec) is shown in Fig. 7a, b
. The integrated data set clustered to nine separate cell types with
differing relative contributions by fetal and adult cells (Fig. 7a ).
Cell cluster identities were annotated based on gene expression analysis
(Fig. 7b ). FGCs of different stages formed separate clusters that were
dominated by fetal cells, whereas fetal oogonia clustered together with
adult oocytes. Similarly, fetal somatic cells annotated as endothelial
cells clustered together with the adult endothelial cells (Fig. 7a–c ).
The week 20–26 granulosa cells fell into the same cluster with adult
granulosa cells, whereas the majority of the earlier stages clustered
with adult stroma cells (Fig. 7c and Supplementary Fig. 4 ). Although
none of the sequenced 24,329 adult cells clustered with the meiotic and
RA responsive FGCs, four cells clustered with the mitotic FGCs (one cell
of C-sec sample, one cell of DDX4 Ab+ sample and two cells of DDX4 Ab−
sample) (Fig. 7c and Supplementary Fig. 4 ), suggesting that they could
potentially be germline stem cells that remain in adult ovaries. The
transcription profile of these four cells was investigated further.
Fetal mitotic FGCs showed a high expression of the pluripotency genes
PRDM14, POU5F1, NANOG , and LIN28A , but none of these markers were
found in the adult cells (Fig. 7d ). Consistently, germline marker genes
expressed in RA responsive and meiotic FGCs ( TFAP2C, STAR8, SYCP3,
NANOS2, NANOS3, DAZL, DPPA3, PRDM1, DDX4, SALL4 , and BOLL ) as well as
oocyte marker genes expressed in fetal oogonia and adult oocytes ( GDF9,
ZP3, FIGLA, OOSP2, LIN28, TUBB8 ) were not detected in the four adult
cells (Fig. 7d ). Based on the gene expression profile of the four adult
cells and their previous clustering behavior in adult data set analysis
(Figs. 2 b and 4b ), these cells are considered to be granulosa,
perivascular, and stroma cells.

[figure 7]

Data sets of unsorted and sorted ovarian cortex cells were used
individually for integration with scRNA-seq data set of human fetal
tissue cells ²² . a UMAP plot showing sample origin of fetal (black) and
adult cells (C-sec data, grey). b UMAP showing nine clusters
representing different cell types annotated based on differential gene
expression analysis. The same clusters as in adult tissue were found, as
well as three new ones: mitotic fetal germ cells, retinoic acid
responsive FGCs, and meiotic FGCs. c Table listing cell numbers from
adult and fetal data sets per annotated cluster. One cell of C-sec
sample, one cell of DDX4 Ab+ sample and two cells of DDX4 Ab− sample
clustered with mitotic FGCs of the fetal sample (in red). These four
cells were manually clustered together and studied further with violin
plots. d Violin plots displaying expression scores of known
pluripotency, germline and oocyte markers in the different FGC clusters
in addition to adult oocyte cluster and the four adult ovarian cells
clustering with mitotic FGCs. C-sec Cesarean section patient, FGCs fetal
germ cells, GRP gender reassignemnt patient, NA non-annotated, UMAP
uniform manifold approximation and projection.

Full size image []

Fig. 7: Investigation of potential germline stem cells in the adult
human ovarian cortex.

Discussion

In this study, we provide a comprehensive map of cell populations in the
human ovarian cortex, including both oocytes and their somatic cell
niche. We identify oocytes, granulosa cells, immune cells, endothelial
cells, perivascular cells, and stroma cells but do not find a germline
stem cell population.

A concern in ovary research is the type of tissue available for research
as healthy ovaries from young women are never surgically removed without
severe indications. C-sec biopsies are small, GRP ovaries influenced by
androgen treatment, and fertility preservation samples affected by the
diagnosis and treatments. In addition, patient age has a major impact on
follicle density and quality ^(6 , 26) . Typically, GRPs are young and
have a high follicle density. Although all GRPs undergo androgen therapy
prior to oophorectomy, their follicles do not differ in distribution,
number and quality from untreated women ²⁷ , and they can achieve
pregnancy after discontinued hormone treatment ²⁸ . In support of this,
our data show that the ovarian cortex from GRPs has the same cell
composition as tissue from C-sec patients. All tissue samples in our
study were verified to have good quality and viable follicles, and the
samples were handled according to protocols used in clinical fertility
preservation ^(29 , 30) .

We succeeded in identifying oocytes from the cortical tissue samples.
The oocytes likely stem from primordial follicles of the ovarian reserve
that resides in the cortex ³¹ . The digested cell suspension underwent
several filtering steps to exclude structures larger than 35 µm of size
prior to analysis. This protocol likely excludes oocytes of growing
follicle stages as oocytes from primordial follicles are ∼ 35 µm in size
compared with primary follicle oocytes that already measure 40 µm ³² .
In addition, the oocytes in our data clustered together with fetal
oogonia, suggesting that they represent the earliest developmental stage
of an oocyte, and stem from the primordial follicles established in the
fetal ovaries. At last, the expression profile of the detected oocytes
lacks markers of oocytes from antral follicles, such as NTF4 , GPD1 ,
and LCP2 ¹⁷ . The granulosa cells detected in our data set also appear
to stem from very early follicles as they clustered together with fetal
week 20–26 granulosa cells ²² and lacked known markers of antral
granulosa cells such as CYP19A1 and FSHR . In addition, our granulosa
cells clustered separate from the ones isolated from antral growing
follicles from the inner part of ovaries ²¹ . Primordial follicle
granulosa cells control follicle activation ³³ and our data can help
isolate these cells for further in vitro functional studies.

Ovaries undergo constant remodeling owing to folliculogenesis and
ovulation, and immune cells have been reported to take part in both
processes ^(34 , 35 , 36) . To further assure proper follicle maturation
and restructuring of ovarian tissue, intense formation of new blood
vessels composed of endothelial and perivascular cells is taking place
in the adult human ovary ^(37 , 38) . Our data are consistent with the
known cell types present in ovaries ²¹ . In our data set, macrophages
and T-cells make up ∼ 0.5% of the ovarian cortex, endothelial cells ∼ 5%
and perivascular cells ∼ 10%. These proportions do not necessarily
reflect the true proportions in ovarian tissues, as the cells in our
analyses were affected by tissue handling and dissociation methods,
which could impact different cell types differently.

Steroidogenesis carried out by gonadotropin-sensitive theca and
granulosa cells of growing follicles is an essential part of ovarian
function. Theca cells are acquired during secondary follicle stage and
they express STAR and CYP17A1, enabling them to synthesize androgens ³⁹
. Androgens are further converted to estrogens by CYP19A1 in granulosa
cells ³⁹ . We do not detect theca cells in our data set or other cells
with coherent signatures of gonadotropin responsiveness or steroidogenic
activity, which is in agreement with known ovarian biology; the cortex
contains predominantly primordial follicles that are independent of
gonadotropins and steroidogenically inactive. However, some cells in the
stroma cluster expressed STAR and CYP17A1 , allowing to hypothesize
about a possible presence of early theca cell precursors ⁴⁰ . The close
relationship between theca cells and stromal cells is further reflected
by the difficulty to separate theca and stromal cell clusters even in
large secondary follicles with visible theca cell layer growth ²¹ .
Identification of factors that trigger theca cell recruitment and
markers to identify the early theca will be needed to understand how
this cell type relates to general stromal cells in cortex and medulla.

Some medical treatments such as chemotherapy lead to early exhaustion of
ovarian reserve and premature ovarian insufficiency ⁴¹ . Some patients
can benefit from fertility preservation via cryopreservation of ovarian
cortical tissue that can be later transplanted for achieving pregnancy
⁴² . Reports of OSCs have given hope of new assisted reproductive
technologies based on cells isolated from ovarian tissue with DDX4 Ab
^(43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47) , although some reports ^(18 , 19 , 20) and
clinical studies ⁴⁸ contradict the existence of OSCs and their clinical
benefit. Our study cannot find OSCs in the ovarian cortex. Instead, our
data imply that the DDX4 Ab+ cells that have been used to treat
infertility in women ⁴⁵ have in fact been perivascular cells.
Interestingly, we note that oocytes can be found among the FACS-sorted
cells. The presence of oocytes in the DDX4 Ab+ cell fraction could help
explain observations, suggesting that DDX4 Ab+ cells can give rise to
oocytes ¹³ . Considering the clinical importance of OSCs, we also
addressed their existence using an unbiased approach by merging our data
with human FGCs, the suggested origin of OSCs in adult ovaries. None of
the studied >24,000 cells expressed an FGC profile, indicating that no
pre-meiotic FGCs remain in adult ovaries. Although this observation is
in line with the known limited reproductive life span of women ⁶ , we
cannot exclude that the OSCs are so rare that we missed their
presence and the analysis of >24,000 cells might not be sufficient to
capture very rare cell types. However, the original papers describing
the isolation of DDX4 Ab+ cells propose that 1.7% of viable cells in
sorting experiments are OSCs ^(13 , 14) . The smallest population we
were able to capture with unbiased clustering approaches was the
oocytes, corresponding to 0.15% of analyzed cells. Finally, it is
possible that OSCs were sensitive to tissue digestion and hence lost
during sample processing.

The FACS-based isolation protocol for OSCs that targets the C-terminal
domain of DDX4 protein by a distinct antibody (ab13840, Abcam) ¹⁴ has
been criticized earlier. DDX4 is an RNA helicase found in the cytoplasm
during germ cell development ¹⁵ and its expression is maintained at a
high level in oocytes ¹⁶ . Considering the function of DDX4 in RNA
metabolism ^(49 , 50) , OSC isolation relying on membrane localization
of DDX4 was questioned. Indeed, experimental ⁵¹ and in silico data ¹⁸
argue against an extracellular localization of the DDX4 C-terminus.
Despite this, the expression of DDX4 C-terminus by DDX4 Ab on the
surface of a cell line overexpressing DDX4 from a plasmid was recently
reported ⁵² . In addition, several groups have been able to isolate a
varying amount of cells from the ovarian cortex using this antibody,
ranging from 1.7 to 42.7% ^(9 , 13 , 19 , 20 , 25) . In our experiments,
the population size varies from 5 to 11.5%. The variation could be
explained by the organization of the vasculature in the ovary. The
initial manual trimming of the poorly vascularized ovarian cortex can
lead to contamination with the highly vascularized medulla (see Fig. 1a
), which could affect the amount of blood vessels and hence perivascular
cells present in the sample. In addition, vascular density inversely
correlates with follicle density in the cortex ⁴⁰ , and this could lead
to varying population size of DDX4 Ab+ cells. Our data also explain how
DDX4 Ab+ “OSCs” have even been isolated from extragonadal tissues such
as liver and kidney ¹⁹ . As all tissues contain blood vessels,
perivascular cells are to be expected. We further show that no other
Ab targeting DDX4 C-terminus can bind to cells in the ovarian cortex,
and that the Abcam Ab stains blood vessels (and oocytes) in ovary tissue
sections. We conclude that the DDX4 Ab (ab13840, Abcam) recognizes an
epitope specifically expressed on perivascular cells.

Perivascular cells include pericytes and smooth muscle cells that
originate from a common progenitor and express distinct sets of markers
²³ . Depending on the type of blood vessel (fine capillary or big
artery) one or both cell types can be found. Interestingly,
tissue-resident pericytes have been suggested to contribute to the
regeneration of various tissues including endometrium owing to their
stem cell potential ⁵³ . In this study, DDX4 Ab+ cells identified as
perivascular cells express markers of pericytes and smooth muscle cells,
suggesting that the epitope recognized by DDX4 Ab is expressed on both
cell types. Whether this could explain the heterogeneity among isolated
DDX4 Ab+ cells from the human ovary observed by others ⁹ remains to be
studied. In addition, the role of perivascular cells in monthly ovarian
regeneration should be addressed in future studies.

Altogether, our data suggest that the adult human ovarian cortex
consists of six main cell types and do not harbor germline stem cells.
These data can be used (i) to isolate and study the specific populations
further in vitro; (ii) to compare these normal cell profiles to those
present in different disease conditions to understand causes of
infertility; and (iii) to further develop artificial ovaries and other
assisted reproductive technologies for infertility.

Methods

Ovarian tissue handling

In the described studies, tissue from 16 GRPs (20–38 yr) and five C-sec
patients (28–37 yr) was used. Prior to gender reassignment surgery, all
GRPs underwent androgen treatment for 14–89 months. All samples were
collected at Karolinska University Hospital and transported in
Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline supplemented with calcium,
magnesium, glucose, and pyruvate (DPBS ⁺⁺⁺⁺ , ThermoFisher Scientific,
USA) to the research laboratory for processing. In GRP ovaries, cortex
was separated from medulla and trimmed to a thickness of ∼ 1 mm using
scalpels. C-sec biopsies were small surface cuts (max. 5 × 5 × 1 mm) and
did not require trimming.

All tissue samples were cryopreserved and quality controlled using
clinical fertility preservation protocols as outlined below
^(29 , 30 , 54) . For histological evaluation, fresh pieces of cortex
were immediately fixed in 4% methanol-free formaldehyde (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) and in Bouin’s solution (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Upon
dehydration and paraffin embedding, tissue was sectioned (4 µm) and
stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and tissue quality was evaluated by
counting and scoring follicles according to established criteria for
follicle morphology evaluation ⁵⁵ . Follicle densities in our C-sec
cohort was 118.3 follicles mm ⁻³ and within the normal range when
compared with other studies ⁵⁶ . GRPs were selected based on high
follicle density determined prior to tissue freezing (see below) and
showed a follicle density of 2962 follicles mm ⁻³ . Proportion of
atretic follicles did not differ between C-sec and GRP tissues
(13.3% ± 13.3 and 18.3% ± 2.4, respectively).

The density and viability of GRP follicles was studied with Neutral Red
stain prior to tissue freezing and viability was found to be 80%. For
assessment of follicle viability in GRP tissue, cortical tissue was
chopped using McIIwain Tissue Chopper (Mickle Laboratory, UK) in
digestion medium composed of McCoy’s (GIBCO, Thermo Fisher Scientific)
medium containing 1 mg mL ⁻¹ human serum albumin (HSA, Vitrolife,
Sweden), 1× GlutaMax (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1× Insulin-Transferrin
solution (GIBCO, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 40 µg mL ⁻¹ Liberase
(Sigma-Aldrich), 0.4 mg mL ⁻¹ Collagenase IV (GIBCO, Thermo Fisher
Scientific), and 0.2 mg mL ⁻¹ DNase I (BioRad, USA). The chopped pieces
were then incubated in digestion medium containing Neutral Red (50 mg mL
⁻¹ , Sigma-Aldrich) in +37 °C shaking for 30–50 min and the digestion
was stopped using termination medium containing McCoy’s + 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The proportion of viable
(red) follicles of all follicles was evaluated under a stereomicroscope
(Leica S9D) (Fig. 1b ). For vitrification of ovarian tissue, our
established vitrification protocol was used as follows ⁵⁷ . Tissue was
cut into pieces of 1 × 1 × 1 mm and transferred into vitrification
solution containing 40% Ethylene Glycol (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 mg mL ⁻¹
HSA for 2 min and 3 min. Then, pieces were transferred into cryo-tubes
and stored in liquid nitrogen. For thawing, cryo-tubes were slightly
opened and equilibrated in room temperature for 30 s. Closed tubes were
then placed into a 37 °C water bath for 1.5 min, and the pieces were
transferred through three different thawing solutions of decreasing
sucrose and increasing HSA concentration for 2 min, 3 min, and 5 min.
For slow-freezing of ovarian tissue, the standard protocol was followed
³⁰ . In brief, cortical tissue was cut into pieces of a maximum size of
10 × 10 × 1 mm and pre-equilibrated in slow-freezing medium containing
7.5% of Ethylene Glycol and 10 mg mL ⁻¹ HSA in DPBS for 30 min shaking
on ice. Pieces were transferred into cryo-tubes containing 1 mL of fresh
slow-freezing solution and placed into controlled rate freezer (Kryo
360–1.7, Planer PLC, UK). For thawing of slow-frozen tissue, cryo-vials
were placed in a 37 °C water bath for 1–2 min, transferred into thawing
solutions with 10 mg mL ⁻¹ HSA and decreasing sucrose concentrations for
10 min, 10 min, and 10 min.

Dissociation of the ovarian cortex into single-cell suspension

Thawed human ovarian cortical tissue was chopped using scalpels into
pieces of ∼ 0.3 mm ³ and enzymatically digested in DMEM/F12 (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) containing 5% FBS, 1 mg mL ⁻¹ collagenase IA
(Sigma-Aldrich), 50 μg mL ⁻¹ Liberase and 1000 U DNase I (Roche,
Sigma-Aldrich) in a shaking 37 °C water bath for max. 50 min. Digestion
was stopped with medium containing 10% FBS and cell suspension was
centrifuged for 7 min on 300 × g . Cells were resuspended in DPBS, 2%
FBS and passed through a 40 μm cell strainer (VWR, USA), counted and
used for subsequent experiments.

Flow cytometry and fluorescence-activated cell sorting

Dissociated ovarian cell suspension was prepared for flow cytometry (FC,
surface marker screen using seven GRPs and validation of markers using
three GRPs) and fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS, scRNA-seq
using three GRPs) following the previously published oogonial stem cell
isolation protocol ¹⁴ . All blocking and antibody incubation steps were
carried out for 20 min on 4 °C. After blocking in DPBS containing 0.02%
bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich and Normal Donkey Serum (1:50,
EMD Millipore, Germany), samples were washed and stained using primary
antibodies (DDX4, ab13840, Abcam; DDX4, SAB1300533, Sigma-Aldrich; DDX4,
AP1403b, Abgent; MCAM (1:100), AF932, R&D Systems; CD9 (1:20), ab2215,
Abcam) diluted in blocking solution. DDX4 antibody was titrated using
concentrations ranging from 5 to 20 μg mL ⁻¹ in 100 μL of cell
suspension (max. 1 × 10 ⁶ cells) and recommended isotype control
antibody (polyclonal rabbit IgG, ab171870, Abcam) was used as negative
control. A distinct population of DDX4 Ab+ cells were found using a
concentration of 10 μg mL ⁻¹ of DDX4 Ab (ab13840) in 100 μL, hence, all
subsequent experiments were performed using this concentration
(Supplementary Fig 2a ). After 20 min, cells were washed and incubated
with secondary antibodies diluted (1:250) in blocking solution: AF488
donkey anti-goat IgG ( A11055 ), AF594 donkey anti-rabbit IgG ( A21207
), AF647 donkey anti-mouse IgG ( A31571 , all from Thermo Fisher
Scientific). 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; 0.2 μg mL ⁻¹ , Thermo
Fisher Scientific) was added to the final cell suspension as a live/dead
marker. Before sorting, cells were transferred into round bottom tubes
through a 35 µm nylon mesh (Falcon, Sigma-Aldrich). Negative and
positive gates for analyzing and sorting cell populations were set using
FMO (fluorescence minus one) controls, isotype controls as well as
samples where primary antibody was omitted. The cells were either
analyzed by FC using CytoFLEX S (Beckman Coulter, USA) equipped with
405, 638, 488, and 561 nm lasers or sorted using a BD FACSAria Fusion
(BD Bioscience, USA) equipped with 405, 640, 488, 355, and 561 nm
lasers. BD FACSDiva software or FlowJo v10 software (Tree Star) was used
for downstream analysis and results are presented as representative FACS
plots.

Single-cell mRNA sequencing of uncultured ovarian cells

Two runs of single-cell mRNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of dissociated,
uncultured ovarian tissue cells were performed. Each run consisted of
two samples that were prepared and sequenced in parallel. In the first
run, unsorted cortical cells from one GRP and three pooled C-sec
patients were analyzed. The samples were digested into single cells in
parallel and dead cells were removed (dead cell removal kit, MACS,
Milteny Biotec, Bergisch-Gladbach, Germany). In the second run, cortex
from three GRPs were pooled, digested into single cells, stained with
DDX4 antibodies, and sorted into live (DAPI negative) DDX4 Ab+ and DDX4
Ab− cell populations. The cell suspensions were transported on 4 °C to
the Eukaryotic Single Cell Genomics Facility (ESCG, SciLifeLab,
Stockholm, Sweden) and prepared immediately for loading into the
10XGenomics Chromium controller for gem formation. The cell viability
before loading was 91.1% (run 1, GRP), 92% (run 1, C-sec), 89% (run 2,
DDX4 Ab+) and 95% (run 2, DDX4 Ab−). For scRNA-seq library preparation,
10XGenomics v2 (unsorted cells) or v3 (sorted populations) was used
according to manufacturer’s instructions and sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000
using a S1 flow cell.

ScRNA-seq output files were converted using Cell Ranger 2.1.1 (unsorted
cells) or Cell Ranger 3.0.1 pipeline (sorted cells) and aligned to the
hg19 transcriptome using STAR aligner ⁵⁸ . Analysis of filtered cells
was performed in R version 3.5.1 ⁵⁹ using Seurat suite version 3.0.0
^(60 , 61) . Details of the web summary of Cell Ranger statistics of
unsorted and sorted data sets can be found in Supplementary Data 1 and 2
, respectively. For downstream bioinformatics analysis of remaining
cells after the initial Cell Ranger filtration based on correctly
detected cellular barcodes, genes expressed in at least three cells were
kept. In order to exclude potential doublets, cells expressing 200–7000
genes, and no more than 25% of mitochondrial genes were kept, resulting
in 24,329 cells in total (12,160 unsorted and 12,169 sorted cells).

For integration of different data sets (unsorted GRP/C-sec), Seurat’s
CCA integration tool was used. The sorted data sets were merged and
regressed for batch effects.

All data sets were column-normalized and log-transformed prior to
selection of highly variable genes, which were used for principal
component analysis. Elbow plot function in Seurat was used to identify
most significant PCs that were included when UMAP analysis was performed
(dimensionality of 13 in unsorted and 12 in sorted data set). A
resolution of 0.1 and a perplexity of 30 was chosen for analysis. In
scRNA-seq analysis of the sorted data set, oocytes clustered with
granulosa cells at a resolution of 0.1. In this case, oocytes were
selected using CellSelector function in Seurat based on analysis of
oocyte markers identified in the unsorted data set. Marker genes
discriminating the different clusters were selected among highly
expressed genes ( p value < 0.01 and log(fold-change) > 0.25) using
Wilcoxon Rank Sum test. In addition, the robustness of clustering was
confirmed identifying clusters from the UMAP using the density based
clustering method HDBSCAN ⁶² , which resulted in similar clusters and
resolved the oocytes from the granulosa cells in both data sets
(Supplementary Fig. 1b ). Signature gene expression was calculated as
percentage of sum counts of selected genes vs all expressed genes. The
percentage ratio is added as feature value to each cell and multiplied
by 100. Scaled gene expression values were used to generate heatmaps.

In vitro culture of DDX4 Ab+ and DDX4 Ab− ovarian tissue cells

Ovarian tissue of two C-sec patients (36y, 37y) was pooled before
dissociated into single cells and sorted based on DDX4 Ab signal. Sorted
DDX4 Ab+ and Ab− cell populations were cultured as follows ¹⁹ . Sorted
cell populations were plated onto irradiated mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(Applied StemCell, USA) in medium consisting of MEMα, 10% FBS, 1 m m
sodium pyruvate, 1× Glutamax, 1% non-essential amino acids, 0.1 n m
2-mercaptoethanol, 1× N2-supplement (R&D Systems), 50 U mL ⁻¹
penicillin, 50 μg mL ⁻¹ streptomycin, 10 ng mL ⁻¹ recombinant human
leukemia inhibitory factor (Merck Millipore), 1 ng mL ⁻¹ basic
fibroblast growth factor (R&D Systems), 40 ng mL ⁻¹ glial cell-derived
neurotropic factor (R&D Systems), and 10 ng mL ⁻¹ recombinant human
epidermal growth factor (all from Life Technologies if not mentioned
otherwise). After passage 3, cultured cells were plated onto mouse
embryonic fibroblast-free 0.1% gelatin-coated plates (Sigma-Aldrich).
DDX4 Ab+ cells and DDX4 Ab− cells were maintained for seven and six
passages, respectively.

Single-cell mRNA sequencing of cultured ovarian cells

After culture, DDX4 Ab+ and Ab− cells were randomly picked by mouth
pipetting into lysis buffer and cDNA libraries were prepared as follows
¹⁹ . Whole-cell lysates were reversely transcribed using SuperScript II
reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, USA) and resulting PCR products were
preamplified using KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (KAPA Biosystems, USA).
Spiked-in samples were sequenced on the Smart-seq2 platform using the
TrueSeq dual-index sequencing primers (illumina, USA) according to
manufacturer’s instructions on a HiSeq 2000.

STAR aligner ⁵⁸ was used to index the hg19 reference genome and align
the resulting fastq files. Mapped reads were then counted in annotated
genes using featureCounts. The annotations and reference genome were
obtained from UCSC Genome Browser ⁶³ . The count table from
featureCounts was imported into R/Bioconductor and differential gene
expression was performed using the EdgeR package and its general linear
models pipeline. For gene expression analysis, genes with at least one
count per million in three or more samples were used and normalized
using TMM normalization. UMAP dimensionality reduction was performed in
R with the uwot package using all genes with at least one count per
million in three or more samples.

Integration of scRNA-seq data sets

The UMI count data of human fetal scRNA-seq were downloaded from
http://github.com/zorrodong/germcell ²² . Female samples expressing
2000–9000 genes with no more than 1,100,000 transcripts were kept,
resulting in 1123 cells in total. FindIntegrationAnchors and
IntegrateData functions in Seurat ⁶¹ were used with dimensionality of
15–40 for the integration of these fetal scRNA-seq data with the
individual adult scRNA-seq data sets (C-sec, GRP, DDX4 Ab+, and DDX4
Ab−, respectively). The cell cycle scores based on G2/M and S phase
markers were calculated by CellCycleScoring function, and these scores
were regressed out using ScaleData function to remove the cell cycle
effect. Identification of the clusters was determined using the
FindClusters function with the resolution which classifies the FGCs into
four clusters as reported in ref. ²² (resolution of 0.9–1.2).

Similarly, scRNA-seq data of the inner part of human ovaries, derived
from 31 tissue samples of five ovaries, were obtained from gene
expression omnibus using accession number GSE118127 ²¹ . These data were
processed with Seurat (v2.3.0) and scran (v1.12.0) to correct the
patient bias by mutual nearest neighbors ⁶⁴ , following the method
described in ref. ²¹ . Finally, 20,676 cells were clustered into 19
clusters as reported, which were then integrated with our 12,610
unsorted ovarian cortex cells, using FindIntegrationAnchors and
IntegrateData functions in Seurat (v3.0.0) with dimensionality of 21.
Cell cycle effect was removed as described above.

Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR)

Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Mini Kit and treated with
RNase-free Dnase (both from Qiagen, Germany). For cDNA synthesis, 10 ng
of total RNA was reversely transcribed using random hexamers and
Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Samples were subjected to qPCR using TaqMan probes for
GAPDH (Hs02786624_g1), MCAM (Hs00174838_m1), and TAGLN (Hs01038777_g1)
and TaqMan Fast Advanced Master Mix (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific)
on the StepOne real-time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, USA). As
negative control, the human embryonic stem cell line HS980 was included
after culture in NutriStem hPSC XF medium (Biological Industries,
Israel) on hrLN-521-coated plates (Biolamina, Sweden) ⁶⁵ . The
experiment was performed on three undissociated pieces of whole ovary
tissue from two donors, respectively, three independently dissociated
ovarian tissue samples, and three independently sorted DDX4 Ab+ and Ab−
cell fractions. All samples were run in technical duplicates. Results
are presented as mean ± SD (standard deviation of mean).

Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)

RNA-FISH was performed using formaldehyde-fixed paraffin-embedded
sections of the ovarian cortex from GRPs in biological triplicates. The
RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent Detection Kit v2 (323120, Advanced Cell
Diagnostics, USA) was used according to manufacturer’s instructions.
Signal from DDX4 (Hs-DDX4-O1-C3, 518571-C3), human-specific positive
control probe targeting Ubiquitin C and negative control probe targeting
the bacterial gene DabB (321831, all from Advanced Cell Diagnostics) was
amplified using TSA with Cy3 (1:1500, Akoya Biosciences, USA). Nuclei
were counterstained using Hoechst (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Images were acquired on a Nikon spinning disk confocal
microscope (Zeiss, Germany) and analyzed using Fiji/ImageJ software
v2.0.

CD marker screen of human ovarian cortex cells

After dissociation of thawed ovarian cortex tissue into a single-cell
suspension, cells were stained using the BD Lyoplate Screening Panels
(BD Biosciences) of 242 monoclonal antibodies following manufacturer’s
instructions. Altogether three runs were carried out. In the first run,
pooled tissue cells from five GRP ovaries were used for the full plate
of 242 CD markers. The subsequent two runs were performed with pooled
tissue cells from four and six GRP ovaries, respectively, to verify the
expression of the markers identified in the first run. DDX4 co-staining
(10 μg mL ⁻¹ , ab13840, Abcam) was carried out in all runs to identify
markers on the surface of DDX4 Ab+ cells. All samples were analyzed in a
96-well format on a CytoFlex S flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter).
Exclusion of dead cells was ensured by gating on the DAPI-negative cell
population using FlowJo v10 software (Tree Star). Results are presented
as percentage of positive live cells and median fluorescence intensity
as well as representative contour plots.

Immunocytochemistry of dissociated ovarian cells

Ovarian tissue from three GRPs was dissociated separately into a bulk
cell suspension passed through a 100 μm cell strainer (VWR, USA) to
leave vessel structures intact and diluted to a concentration of 50,000
cells in 100 μL of DPBS (ThermoFisher Scientific) containing 2% FBS.
Samples were cytospinned onto glass slides (VWR) using Cytocentrifuge
(CytoSpin 4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 1200 rpm for 4 min. Slides
were dried in room temperature for 2–4 h and fixed with 4% methanol-free
formaldehyde for 10 min. Cells were permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X-100
(Sigma-Aldrich) in DPBS for 10 min, followed by blocking in DPBS/4%
FBS/0.1% Tween-20 (P9416, Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h. Primary antibodies
(DDX4, 10 μg mL ⁻¹ , ab13840, Abcam; CD9, 1:200, 312102, BioLegend;
MCAM, 1:100, AF932, R&D systems) were diluted in blocking solution and
cells were stained overnight at 4 °C, followed by incubation with
secondary antibodies diluted 1:1000 in blocking solution for 2 h at room
temperature (AF488 donkey anti-goat IgG, AF594 donkey anti-mouse IgG,
AF647 donkey anti-rabbit IgG; all from Thermo Fisher Scientific, A11055
, A21203 , A31573 , respectively). Cell nuclei were counterstained using
Hoechst (1:1000, Invitrogen). Cells were mounted using fluorescent
mounting medium (Dako Agilent, USA, California) and imaged with Olympus
IX81 fluorescence microscope (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Germany) or Nikon
spinning disk confocal microscope (Nikon). Acquired images were analyzed
using Fiji/ImageJ software v2.0.

Immunohistochemistry of ovarian tissue sections

Immunohistochemistry was performed on freshly formaldehyde-fixed
paraffin-embedded cortex sections (4 μm) of at least two GRPs in
technical triplicates. After de-paraffinization and rehydration, antigen
retrieval was performed in either 10 m m Sodium Citrate (pH 6) or 10 m m
Tris/1 m m EDTA (pH 9) at 96 °C for 30 min. After blocking in 5% BSA and
Normal Donkey Serum, tissue sections were incubated in primary antibody
(DDX4, 10 μg mL ⁻¹ , ab13840, Abcam; CD9, 1:200, 312102, BioLegend;
MCAM, 1:100, AF932, R&D systems, RGS5, 1:50, MA5-25584, Invitrogen;
CD31, 1:200, M0823, Dako; TAGLN, 1:100, MAB78861, R&D systems) overnight
at 4 °C, followed by incubation with secondary antibody diluted 1:200 in
blocking solution for 1 h at room temperature: AF488 donkey anti-goat
IgG, AF594 donkey anti-mouse IgG, AF647 donkey anti-rabbit IgG (all from
Thermo Fisher Scientific, A11055 , A21203 , A31573 , respectively).
Stained tissue sections were mounted in fluorescent mounting media (Dako
Agilent) and imaged with Olympus IX81 fluorescence microscope (Carl
Zeiss Meditec, Germany) or Nikon ultra fast widefiled microscope (Nikon,
Germany). Acquired images were analyzed using Fiji/ImageJ software v2.0.

Ethics statement

Use of ovarian tissue in research was approved by Stockholm Region
Ethical Review Board (Dnr. 2010/549–31/2, Dnr. 2015/798–31/2).
Independent clinicians informed the patients about the study, and
cortical tissue was biopsied from C-sec patients and whole ovaries
collected from GRPs after written informed consent. Use of hESCs (HS980)
was approved by the Swedish Ethical Review Authority (Dnr.
2011/745:31/3). HESCs were derived from whole inner cell mass of
blastocysts after informed written consent from both parents ⁶⁵ .

Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Data availability

The 10xGenomics and Smart-seq2 scRNA-seq data that support the finding
of this study have been deposited in the ArrayExpress database at
EMBL-EBI and are available under the accession codes ‘ E-MTAb−8381 ’ and
‘ E-MTAb−8403 ’, respectively.

Code availability

The scRNA-seq data analysis was performed using scripts in R, which are
available in github, ‘SingleCellOvary [
https://github.com/wagmag/SingleCellOvary ]’.

References

1.  Sarraj, M. A. & Drummond, A. E. Mammalian foetal ovarian
    development: consequences for health and disease. Reproduction 143 ,
    151–163 (2012).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

2.  Cohen, P. E. & Holloway, J. K. Predicting gene networks in human
    oocyte meiosis. Biol. Reprod. 82 , 469–472 (2010).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

3.  MacLennan, M. et al. Oocyte development, meiosis and aneuploidy.
    Semin Cell Dev. Biol. 45 , 68–76 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

4.  Hsueh, A. J. et al. Intraovarian control of early folliculogenesis.
    Endocr. Rev. 36 , 1–24 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

5.  Findlay, J. K. et al. How is the number of primordial follicles in
    the ovarian reserve established? Biol. Reprod. 93 , 111 (2015).

    Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar

6.  Wallace, W. H. & Kelsey, T. W. Human ovarian reserve from conception
    to the menopause. PLoS ONE 5 , e8772 (2010).

    Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

7.  McGee, E. A. & Hsueh, A. J. Initial and cyclic recruitment of
    ovarian follicles. Endocr. Rev. 21 , 200–214 (2000).

    CAS PubMed Google Scholar

8.  Gold, E. B. The timing of the age at which natural menopause occurs.
    Obstet. Gynecol. Clin. North Am. 38 , 425–440 (2011).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

9.  Clarkson, Y. L. et al. Initial characterisation of adult human
    ovarian cell populations isolated by DDX4 expression and aldehyde
    dehydrogenase activity. Sci. Rep. 8 , 6953 (2018).

    Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

10. Parte, S. et al. Detection, characterization, and spontaneous
    differentiation in vitro of very small embryonic-like putative stem
    cells in adult mammalian ovary. Stem Cells Dev. 20 , 1451–1464
    (2011).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

11. Silvestris, E. et al. In vitro differentiation of human oocyte-like
    cells from oogonial stem cells: single-cell isolation and molecular
    characterization. Hum. Reprod. 33 , 464–473 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

12. Stimpfel, M. et al. Isolation, characterization and differentiation
    of cells expressing pluripotent/multipotent markers from adult human
    ovaries. Cell Tissue Res. 354 , 593–607 (2013).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

13. White, Y. A. et al. Oocyte formation by mitotically active germ
    cells purified from ovaries of reproductive-age women. Nat. Med. 18
    , 413–421 (2012).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

14. Woods, D. C. & Tilly, J. L. Isolation, characterization and
    propagation of mitotically active germ cells from adult mouse and
    human ovaries. Nat. Protoc. 8 , 966–988 (2013).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

15. Smorag, L. et al. The roles of DAZL in RNA biology and development.
    Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. RNA 5 , 527–535 (2014).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

16. Castrillon, D. H. et al. The human VASA gene is specifically
    expressed in the germ cell lineage. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97 ,
    9585–9590 (2000).

    Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

17. Zhang, Y. et al. Transcriptome landscape of human folliculogenesis
    reveals oocyte and granulosa cell interactions. Mol. Cell 72 ,
    1021–1034.e4 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

18. Zarate-Garcia, L. et al. FACS-sorted putative oogonial stem cells
    from the ovary are neither DDX4-positive nor germ cells. Sci. Rep. 6
    , 27991 (2016).

    Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

19. Zhang, H. et al. Adult human and mouse ovaries lack DDX4-expressing
    functional oogonial stem cells. Nat. Med. 21 , 1116–1118 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

20. Hernandez, S. F. et al. Characterization of extracellular DDX4- or
    Ddx4-positive ovarian cells. Nat. Med. 21 , 1114–1116 (2015).

    Article MathSciNet CAS PubMed Google Scholar

21. Fan, X. et al. Single-cell reconstruction of follicular remodeling
    in the human adult ovary. Nat. Commun. 10 , 3164 (2019).

    Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

22. Li, L. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis maps development of human
    germline cells and gonadal niche interactions. Cell Stem Cell 20 ,
    858–873 e4 (2017).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

23. Kumar, A. et al. Specification and diversification of pericytes and
    smooth muscle cells from mesenchymoangioblasts. Cell Rep. 19 ,
    1902–1916 (2017).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

24. Haque, A. et al. A practical guide to single-cell RNA-sequencing for
    biomedical research and clinical applications. Genome Med. 9 , 75
    (2017).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

25. Ding, X. et al. Human GV oocytes generated by mitotically active
    germ cells obtained from follicular aspirates. Sci. Rep. 6 , 28218
    (2016).

    Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

26. Ford, J. H. Reduced quality and accelerated follicle loss with
    female reproductive aging - does decline in theca
    dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) underlie the problem? J. Biomed. Sci.
    20 , 93 (2013).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

27. De Roo, C. et al. Ovarian tissue cryopreservation in female-to-male
    transgender people: insights into ovarian histology and physiology
    after prolonged androgen treatment. Reprod. Biomed. Online 34 ,
    557–566 (2017).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

28. Light, A. D. et al. Transgender men who experienced pregnancy after
    female-to-male gender transitioning. Obstet. Gynecol. 124 ,
    1120–1127 (2014).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

29. Kristensen, S. G. et al. A simple method to quantify follicle
    survival in cryopreserved human ovarian tissue. Hum. Reprod. 33 ,
    2276–2284 (2018).

    CAS PubMed Google Scholar

30. Rosendahl, M. et al. Cryopreservation of ovarian tissue for a decade
    in Denmark: a view of the technique. Reprod. Biomed. Online 22 ,
    162–171 (2011).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

31. Haino, T. et al. Determination of follicular localization in human
    ovarian cortex for vitrification. J. Adolesc. Young. Adult Oncol. 7
    , 46–53 (2018).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

32. Westergaard, C. G., Byskov, A. G. & Andersen, C. Y. Morphometric
    characteristics of the primordial to primary follicle transition in
    the human ovary in relation to age. Hum. Reprod. 22 , 2225–2231
    (2007).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

33. Zhang, H. et al. Somatic cells initiate primordial follicle
    activation and govern the development of dormant oocytes in mice.
    Curr. Biol. 24 , 2501–2508 (2014).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

34. Best, C. L. et al. Localization and characterization of white blood
    cell populations within the human ovary throughout the menstrual
    cycle and menopause. Hum. Reprod. 11 , 790–797 (1996).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

35. Wu, R. et al. Macrophage contributions to ovarian function. Hum.
    Reprod. Update 10 , 119–133 (2004).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

36. Brannstrom, M. et al. Localization of leukocyte subsets in the
    follicle wall and in the corpus luteum throughout the human
    menstrual cycle. Fertil. Steril. 61 , 488–495 (1994).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

37. Hazzard, T. M. & Stouffer, R. L. Angiogenesis in ovarian follicular
    and luteal development. Baillieres Best Pract Res. Clin. Obstet.
    Gynaecol. 14 , 883–900 (2000).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

38. Suzuki, T. et al. Cyclic changes of vasculature and vascular
    phenotypes in normal human ovaries. Hum. Reprod. 13 , 953–959
    (1998).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

39. Young, J. M. & McNeilly, A. S. Theca: the forgotten cell of the
    ovarian follicle. Reproduction 140 , 489–504 (2010).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

40. Delgado-Rosas, F. et al. Superficial ovarian cortex vascularization
    is inversely related to the follicle reserve in normal cycling
    ovaries and is increased in polycystic ovary syndrome. Hum. Reprod.
    24 , 1142–1151 (2009).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

41. Donnez, J. et al. Ovarian tissue cryopreservation and
    transplantation: a review. Hum. Reprod. Update 12 , 519–535 (2006).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

42. Donnez, J. & Dolmans, M. M. Fertility preservation in women. N.
    Engl. J. Med. 377 , 1657–1665 (2017).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

43. Akahori, T., Woods, D. C. & Tilly, J. L. Female fertility
    preservation through stem cell-based ovarian tissue reconstitution
    in vitro and ovarian regeneration in vivo. Clin. Med. Insights
    Reprod. Health 13 , 1179558119848007 (2019).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

44. Martin, J. J., Woods, D. C. & Tilly, J. L. Implications and current
    limitations of oogenesis from female germline or oogonial stem cells
    in adult mammalian ovaries. Cells 8 , 93 (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed Central Google Scholar

45. Oktay, K. et al. Oogonial precursor cell-derived autologous
    mitochondria injection to improve outcomes in women with multiple
    ivf failures due to low oocyte quality: a clinical translation.
    Reprod. Sci. 22 , 1612–1617 (2015).

    Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar

46. Woods, D. C. & Tilly, J. L. Autologous germline mitochondrial energy
    transfer (AUGMENT) in human assisted reproduction. Semin. Reprod.
    Med. 33 , 410–421 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

47. Fakih, M. H. et al. The AUGMENTSM treatment: physician reported
    outcomes of the initial global patient experience. JFIV Reprod. Med.
    Genet. 3 , 154 (2015).

48. Labarta, E. et al. Autologous mitochondrial transfer as a
    complementary technique to intracytoplasmic sperm injection to
    improve embryo quality in patients undergoing in vitro
    fertilization-a randomized pilot study. Fertil. Steril. 111 , 86–96
    (2019).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

49. Fujiwara, Y. et al. Isolation of a DEAD-family protein gene that
    encodes a murine homolog of Drosophila vasa and its specific
    expression in germ cell lineage. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 91 ,
    12258–12262 (1994).

    Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

50. Noce, T., Okamoto-Ito, S. & Tsunekawa, N. Vasa homolog genes in
    mammalian germ cell development. Cell Struct. Funct. 26 , 131–136
    (2001).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

51. Nott, T. J. et al. Phase transition of a disordered nuage protein
    generates environmentally responsive membraneless organelles. Mol.
    Cell 57 , 936–947 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

52. Clarkson, Y. L. et al. Extracellular localisation of the C-terminus
    of DDX4 confirmed by immunocytochemistry and fluorescence-activated
    cell sorting. Cells 8 , pii: E578 (2019).

53. Spitzer, T. L. et al. Perivascular human endometrial mesenchymal
    stem cells express pathways relevant to self-renewal, lineage
    specification, and functional phenotype. Biol. Reprod. 86 , 58
    (2012).

    Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar

54. Kristensen, S. G. et al. Isolation of pre-antral follicles from
    human ovarian medulla tissue. Hum. Reprod. 26 , 157–166 (2011).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

55. Gougeon, A. Regulation of ovarian follicular development in
    primates: facts and hypotheses. Endocr. Rev. 17 , 121–155 (1996).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

56. Schmidt, K. L. et al. Density and distribution of primordial
    follicles in single pieces of cortex from 21 patients and in
    individual pieces of cortex from three entire human ovaries. Hum.
    Reprod. 18 , 1158–1164 (2003).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

57. Sheikhi, M. et al. Preservation of human ovarian follicles within
    tissue frozen by vitrification in a xeno-free closed system using
    only ethylene glycol as a permeating cryoprotectant. Fertil. Steril.
    100 , 170–7.e1 (2013).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

58. Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner.
    Bioinformatics 29 , 15–21 (2013).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

59. Team, R. C. R: A language and environment for statistical computing.
    (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2013).

    Google Scholar

60. Butler, A. et al. Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across
    different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat. Biotechnol. 36
    , 411–420 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

61. Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data.
    Cell 177 , 1888–1902.e21 (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

62. Campello, R. J. G. B., Moulavi, D. & Sander, J. Density-Based
    Clustering Based on Hierarchical Density Estimates. (Springer Berlin
    Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013).

    Book Google Scholar

63. Haeussler, M. et al. The UCSC Genome Browser database: 2019 update.
    Nucleic Acids Res. 47 (D1), p. D853–d858 (2019).

    Article CAS Google Scholar

64. Haghverdi, L. et al. Batch effects in single-cell RNA-sequencing
    data are corrected by matching mutual nearest neighbors. Nat.
    Biotechnol. 36 , 421–427 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

65. Rodin, S. et al. Clonal culturing of human embryonic stem cells on
    laminin-521/E-cadherin matrix in defined and xeno-free environment.
    Nat. Commun. 5 , 3195 (2014).

    Article ADS PubMed CAS Google Scholar

Download references []

Acknowledgements

We thank all clinicians helping us with patient recruitment and tissue
collection as well as all patients donating ovarian tissue to our
studies. In particular, the irreplaceable help from Catarina Arnelo and
Boel Niklasson is warmly acknowledged. Claus Yding Andersen is thanked
for kindly teaching us controlled rate freezing and follicle viability
assay. Richelle Björvang, Astrud Tuck, and Jasmin Hassan are thanked for
the help with ovarian tissue handling. Sandra Petrus-Reurer is thanked
for help with the experimental design. FC analysis and cell sorting were
performed at the MedH Flow Cytometry core facility, Karolinska
Institutet, Sweden. Sequencing was performed at the ESCG at Science for
Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden. We thank Tarja Schröder and
Morphological Phenotype Analysis facility, Karolinska Institutet,
Sweden, for H&E stains and tissue scans. Imaging of stained samples was
performed at the Live Cell Imaging facility/Nikon Center of Excellence,
Karolinska Institutet, Sweden. This work was supported by the Swedish
Research Council (P.D, M.W., F.L., J.K.), the Swedish Research Council
for Sustainable Development (P.D.), the Swedish Childhood Cancer
Foundation (P.D.), Karolinska Institutet PhD student funding (M.W.), the
Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation (J.K. and F.L.); Wallenberg Academy
Fellow, Ragnar Söderberg Foundation, The Ming Wai Lau Center for
Reparative Medicine, Center for Innovative Medicine/SLL (F.L.); the
Scandinavia-Japan Sasakawa Foundation, the Japan Eye Bank Association,
the Astellas Foundation for Research on Metabolic Disorders, and the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science Overseas Research Fellowships
(M.Y.). This project has also received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement No.
825100 (FREIA) (P.D., M.W.). Open access funding provided by Karolinska
Institute.

Author information

Author notes

1.  Iyadh Douagi

    Present address: Flow Cytometry Section, Research Technologies
    Branch, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
    National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA

2.  These authors contributed equally: Fredrik Lanner, Pauliina
    Damdimopoulou.

Authors and Affiliations

1.  Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Clinical
    Science, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institutet and
    Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden

    Magdalena Wagner, Sarita Panula, Sophie Petropoulos, Haojiang
    Lu, Karin Pettersson, Kerstin Palm, Outi Hovatta, Fredrik
    Lanner & Pauliina Damdimopoulou

2.  Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet,
    Stockholm, Sweden

    Masahito Yoshihara, Shintaro Katayama & Juha Kere

3.  Center of Hematology and Regenerative Medicine, Department of
    Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

    Iyadh Douagi

4.  Bioinformatics and Expression Analysis core facility, Karolinska
    Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

    Anastasios Damdimopoulos

5.  Department of Medicine, Centre de recherche du CHUM, University of
    Montreal, Montreal, Canada

    Sophie Petropoulos

6.  Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Visby hospital, Visby,
    Sweden

    Kerstin Palm

7.  Folkhälsan Research Institute, Helsinki, and Stem Cells and
    Metabolism Research Program, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
    Finland

    Juha Kere

8.  Ming Wai Lau Center for Reparative Medicine, Stockholm node,
    Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

    Fredrik Lanner

Authors

1.   Magdalena Wagner
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
2.   Masahito Yoshihara
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
3.   Iyadh Douagi
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
4.   Anastasios Damdimopoulos
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
5.   Sarita Panula
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
6.   Sophie Petropoulos
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
7.   Haojiang Lu
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
8.   Karin Pettersson
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
9.   Kerstin Palm
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
10.  Shintaro Katayama
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
11.  Outi Hovatta
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
12.  Juha Kere
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
13.  Fredrik Lanner
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
14.  Pauliina Damdimopoulou
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar

Contributions

M.W. carried out the experiments, analyzed data, performed sequencing
analysis, and wrote the paper. M.Y., S.K., and A.D. carried out
bioinformatic analyses. I.D. conceived the experiments and sorted cell
populations. S. Panula and S. Petropoulos performed scRNA-seq experiment
of cultured ovarian tissue cells. H.J. contributed to the surface marker
screen verification. K. Palm and K. Pettersson coordinated patient
recruitment, carried out surgeries, and evaluated patient health. O.H.
conceived the experiments and supervised the project. J.K. contributed
to essential resources and helped draft the manuscript. F.L. and P.D.
conceived the experiments, analyzed data, supervised the project, and
wrote the paper. All authors contributed to the preparation of the paper
and approved the final version.

Corresponding authors

Correspondence to Fredrik Lanner or Pauliina Damdimopoulou .

Ethics declarations

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information

Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Barbara
Vanderhyden, Isabelle Stevant and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for
their contribution to the peer review of this work.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Supplementary information

Supplementary Information

Supplementary Dataset 1

Supplementary Dataset 2

Supplementary Dataset 3

Reporting Summary

Description of Additional Supplementary Files

Rights and permissions

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use
is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .

Reprints and permissions

About this article

[Check for updates. Verify currency and authenticity via CrossMark]

Cite this article

Wagner, M., Yoshihara, M., Douagi, I. et al. Single-cell analysis of
human ovarian cortex identifies distinct cell populations but no
oogonial stem cells. Nat Commun 11 , 1147 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14936-3

Download citation []

-   Received : 22 October 2019

-   Accepted : 10 February 2020

-   Published : 02 March 2020

-   DOI : https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14936-3

Share this article

Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this
content:

Get shareable link

Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.

Copy to clipboard

Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative

Subjects

-   Cell biology
-   Stem-cell niche

This article is cited by

-   Hyperplastic ovarian stromal cells express genes associated to tumor progression: a case study

    -   Arpna Sharma
    -   Frank Becker
    -   Jens Vanselow

    BMC Veterinary Research (2024)

-   Unraveling the impact of hyperleptinemia on female reproduction: insights from transgenic pig model

    -   Muhammad Ameen Jamal
    -   Yixiao Cheng
    -   Hong-Jiang Wei

    Biological Research (2024)

-   Spatiotemporal transcriptomic changes of human ovarian aging and the regulatory role of FOXP1

    -   Meng Wu
    -   Weicheng Tang
    -   Shixuan Wang

    Nature Aging (2024)

-   The senolytic drug ABT-263 accelerates ovarian aging in older female mice

    -   Xiyang Xia
    -   Yingying Yang
    -   Yufeng Wang

    Scientific Reports (2024)

-   In-depth analysis of transcriptomes in ovarian cortical follicles from children and adults reveals interfollicular heterogeneity

    -   Ilmatar Rooda
    -   Jasmin Hassan
    -   Pauliina Damdimopoulou

    Nature Communications (2024)
