[Cell] 
 
Cell 
 
Volume 185, Issue 2, 20 January 2022, Pages 379-396.e38 
 
[Journal home page for Cell] 
 
Resource 
 
Spatial proteogenomics reveals distinct and evolutionarily conserved hepatic macrophage niches 
 
Author links open overlay panel 
 
Martin Guilliams 1 2 23 25[][] 
 
, 
 
Johnny Bonnardel 1 2 23 
 
, 
 
Birthe Haest 1 2 23 
 
, 
 
Bart Vanderborght 3 4 23 
 
, 
 
Camille Wagner 1 2 
 
, 
 
Anneleen Remmerie 2 5 
 
, 
 
Anna Bujko 2 5 
 
, 
 
Liesbet Martens 1 2 5 
 
, 
 
Tinne Thone 1 2 5 
 
, 
 
Robin Browaeys 6 7 
 
, 
 
Federico F. De Ponti 2 5 
 
, 
 
Bavo Vanneste 1 2 5 
 
, 
 
Christian Zwicker 2 5 
 
, 
 
Freya R. Svedberg 1 2 
 
, 
 
Tineke Vanhalewyn 1 2 5 
 
, 
 
Amanda Goncalves 2 8 
 
, 
 
Saskia Lippens 2 8 
 
, 
 
Bert Devriendt 9 
 
, 
 
Eric Cox 9 
 
, 
 
Giuliano Ferrero 10 
 
... 
 
Charlotte L. Scott 2 5 24[][] 
 
Show more[] 
 
[]Outline 
 
[]Add to Mendeley 
 
[]Share 
 
[]Cite 
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.12.018[]Get rights and content[] 
 
Under a Creative Commons license[] 
 
open access 
 
Referred to by 
 
To be or not to be a hepatic niche macrophage 
 
Immunity, Volume 55, Issue 2, 8 February 2022, Pages 198-200 
 
Emelie Barreby, Myriam Aouadi 
 
[]View PDF 
 
Highlights 
 
- * 
 Spatial proteogenomic single-cell atlas of healthy and obese murine and human liver 
- * 
 Validated flow cytometry and microscopy panels for all hepatic cells 
- * 
 LAMs are differentially located in the lean and obese liver 
- * 
 Evolutionary conserved BMP9/10-ALK1 axis is essential for KC development 
 
Summary 
 
The liver is the largest solid organ in the body, yet it remains incompletely characterized. Here we present a spatial proteogenomic atlas of the healthy and obese human and murine liver combining single-cell CITE-seq, single-nuclei sequencing, spatial transcriptomics, and spatial proteomics. By integrating these multi-omic datasets, we provide validated strategies to reliably discriminate and localize all hepatic cells, including a population of lipid-associated macrophages (LAMs) at the bile ducts. We then align this atlas across seven species, revealing the conserved program of bona fide Kupffer cells and LAMs. We also uncover the respective spatially resolved cellular niches of these macrophages and the microenvironmental circuits driving their unique transcriptomic identities. We demonstrate that LAMs are induced by local lipid exposure, leading to their induction in steatotic regions of the murine and human liver, while Kupffer cell development crucially depends on their cross-talk with hepatic stellate cells via the evolutionarily conserved ALK1-BMP9/10 axis. 
 
Graphical abstract 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (421KB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
- []Previous article in issue 
- Next article in issue[] 
 
Keywords 
 
liver 
 
atlas 
 
spatial transcriptomics 
 
CITE-seq 
 
proteogenomic 
 
across species 
 
multi-omic 
 
lipid-associated macrophage 
 
Kupffer cell 
 
NAFLD 
 
Introduction 
 
The immense advances in single-cell transcriptomics have enabled a better understanding of the cellular composition of different organs across species. However, we still lack information regarding how these cells are organized in their distinct microenvironmental niches. Moreover, the specific cell-cell interactions determining the identity of individual cells within tissues remain to be defined (Guilliams and Scott, 2017; Lindeboom et al., 2021). While the spatial organization of hepatocytes within the liver is understood (Halpern et al., 2017), that of non-parenchymal liver cells remains unclear. This is the case for the mouse liver, but even more so for the human liver, where the identity and the precise localization of most hepatic cells is unknown. Moreover, the link between the transcriptome and the proteome has not been studied, resulting in a lack of reliable surface markers to identify these cells by flow cytometry and confocal microscopy. Here, we used proteogenomic techniques including cellular indexing of transcriptomes and epitomes by sequencing (CITE-seq) and spatial approaches to identify all cells and their specific locations within the healthy and obese livers of mice and humans. By doing so, we have developed strategies for the identification and further study of hepatic cells. Demonstrating the usefulness of this approach, we identify the evolutionary conserved and spatially restricted signals driving the distinct hepatic macrophage phenotypes. 
 
Results 
 
A practical proteogenomic atlas of the murine liver 
 
To generate a proteogenomic atlas of the liver, we first examined the optimal method for retrieving all hepatic cells. Using the murine liver, we compared single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) using cells isolated via ex vivo or in vivo enzymatic digestion with single-nuclei RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) (Figures S1A-S1C). We did not observe any differences in the number of genes/cell between the two digestion methods (Figures S1D and S1E), but snRNA-seq typically yielded a lower number of genes/cell (Figures S1D and S1F). This did not prevent distinct cell types from being identified in the snRNA-seq dataset as both scRNA-seq and snRNA-seq identified highly expressed genes in each population. However, expression was often higher in the scRNA-seq (Figure S1F). Additionally, we observed a signature of digestion-associated genes and snRNA-seq-associated genes across cell types (Figure S1F). While in terms of genes/cell snRNA-seq is inferior to scRNA-seq, this method best recapitulated the cell frequencies observed in vivo (Figures S1D-S1N). As each method has advantages and disadvantages, the optimal method to use depends on the biological question being addressed. Here, as we sought to generate a proteogenomic atlas of all hepatic cells, we thus opted to use a combination of all protocols. To investigate mRNA and protein expression at single-cell resolution, we used CITE-seq (Stoeckius et al., 2017), staining a selection of the scRNA-seq samples with 107-161 oligo-conjugated antibodies (Figure 1A). Data were pooled together for a single analysis where, with TotalVI (Gayoso et al., 2021), both the protein and mRNA profiles were considered for clustering (Figure 1B). Analysis of the differentially expressed genes and proteins (DEGs/DEPs; Figures S2A and S2B; Table S1) identified 17 cell types (Figure 1B), which were differentially represented with each isolation method (Figure S2C). Addition of antibodies in the CITE-seq analysis enabled surface markers for all cells to be identified, including VSIG4 and FOLR2 for Kupffer cells (KCs) (Figure S2B), without affecting the quality of the transcriptomic data (Figure 2D). This analysis identified one subset of KCs. However, 2 subpopulations termed KC1 and KC2 have recently been described (Bleriot et al., 2021; Simone et al., 2021). As our CITE-seq analysis identified that the markers used to identify KC2s, namely CD206 and ESAM, are largely expressed by liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) (Figure S2E), we next sought to determine if we had previously removed any potential KC2s in our initial QC steps as LSEC-KC doublets. To examine this, we generated a UMAP of samples containing CD206 and ESAM in the CITE-seq panel and performed a minimal QC filtering on number of genes and percentage of mitochondrial genes. In this UMAP, we found multiple subpopulations including 3 populations of KCs and 2 populations of B cells (Figure S2F). To determine if any of these populations could be KC2s, we harnessed the power of CITE-seq to recreate the gating strategy recently proposed to identify KC2s (Bleriot et al., 2021). Converting the CITE-seq data into an FCS file and analyzing this in FlowJo identified 2 of the KC populations to be KC2s expressing CD206 and ESAM, and these cells were present in a similar ratio among KCs as reported by Bleriot et al. (Figure S2G). However, employing the same gating strategy with the B cells also enabled a B cell2 population to be identified (Figure S2G). The KC2 and B cell2 populations also expressed other protein markers associated with LSECs including CD26, CD31, and CD38, suggesting that these may be doublets (Figure S2H). Consistent with this, we did not uncover any DEGs specifically expressed in the KC2s or B cell2s, rather these cells had an intermediate profile between either KC1s or B cell1s and LSECs (Figure S2I), as would be expected for doublets. Finally, we perfused the livers with antigen fix to inflate the LSECs to be able to distinguish more readily between KCs and LSECs and performed confocal microscopy. 3D reconstruction of these images indicates that CD206 expression is observed primarily in the LSECs with which the KCs are intertwined. These microscopy images also show that KCs express some CD206, however, consistent with our CITE-seq analysis, this was observed across the KC population rather than in a KC subset further suggesting the existence of only one-KC population (Figure S2J). With this in mind, we decided to continue to apply our initial strict QC controls eliminating these potential doublets from further analyses. 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (3MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure S1. Cell types identified in transcriptomic studies depend upon cell/nuclei isolation technique used, related to Figure 1 
 
Cells were isolated from livers of healthy C57B/l6 mice by either ex vivo or in vivo enzymatic digestion. Alternatively, livers were snap frozen and nuclei subsequently isolated following tissue homogenization by a sucrose gradient (3 mice per isolation method). Live cells/intact nuclei were identified and purified using flow cytometry. For the cells, either live CD45+, live CD45- or live hepatocytes were sorted. 1 ex vivo digested sample and 1 in vivo digested sample were also stained with a panel of 107 (ex vivo cells) or 161 (in vivo cells) oligo-conjugated antibodies for CITE-seq analysis. FACS-purified cells/nuclei were loaded onto the 10x chromium platform and scRNA-seq, CITE-seq, or snRNA-seq performed. Following clean up and QC, cells from the same mice were pooled together in the same ratios (CD45+:CD45-:Heps) as found in the tissue as a whole before sorting, different mice were then pooled together and the data were analyzed using scVI. 
 
(A-C) UMAPs showing annotations of cell types and proportions of each cell type as a % of total cells in the UMAP isolated using (A) ex vivo digestion; 13,144 cells, (B) in vivo digestion; 24,014 cells and (C) nuclei; 8,583 nuclei. 
 
(D) Average number of genes/cell in the annotated mac, B cell, hepatocyte, endothelial, and stromal cell populations following each isolation method. ^(*)p < 0.05 one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test per cell type. 
 
(E) Correlation plot showing genes captured within the mac population when the liver is digested with the in vitro versus the in vivo digestion protocol. 
 
(F) Correlation plots showing genes captured within the mac, endothelial cell, and hepatocyte populations when cells are isolated using the in vivo digestion protocol or nuclei are isolated. 
 
(G-L) Confocal microscopy images to determine true abundance of (G) stromal cells and cholangiocytes (H) endothelial cells, (I) macs, (J) dendritic cells, (K) B cells, and (L) T cells in vivo. Scale bars, 200 mm. 
 
(M) The percentage of each population was calculated based on the percentage of a given population divided by the total number of nuclei. A threshold was applied to the DAPI channel (picture 1) in ImageJ (picture 2) and nuclei were automatically counted based on the ImageJ "analyze particles" plugin (size [micron^(2) = 10-1,000; circularity = 0-1; picture 3]). Due to the density of some liver zones, some nuclei were not automatically counted (arrow, picture 3). Those were then manually counted and added to the total number of nuclei. For the populations of interest, cells were counted manually based on specific markers (for example, CD3 for T cells, picture 4). Counting was performed blinded prior to analysis of the sequencing results. 
 
(N) Proportion of indicated cell types as a % of total cells identified in confocal microscopy images. Data are from 3-7 images per cell type taken from 2-4 mice. 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (3MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure 1. A proteogenomic atlas of the healthy murine liver 
 
(A) Hepatic cells were isolated from healthy C57B/l6 mice by ex vivo (5 mice, 15 samples) or in vivo (5 mice, 19 samples) enzymatic digestion. Alternatively, nuclei were isolated by tissue homogenization (4 mice, 12 samples). Live cells/intact nuclei were FACS-purified. For cells, total live, live CD45+, live CD45-, live hepatocytes, or myeloid cells (live CD45+, CD3-, CD19-, B220-, NK1.1-) were sorted. 18 samples (7 ex vivo, 11 in vivo) were also stained with a panel of 107-161 barcode-labeled antibodies for CITE-seq analysis. All datasets were pooled together and after QC 185,894 cells/nuclei were clustered using TotalVI. 
 
(B) UMAP of sc/snRNA-seq data. 
 
(C) Tissue and capsule images from Visium analysis with clusters overlaid. 
 
(D) UMAP of zonation of Visium spots (left) and origin of the cells (right). 
 
(E) Zonation pattern mapped onto tissue slice. 
 
(F and G) Indicated cell signatures from sc/snRNA-seq mapped onto the Visium zonation data. 
 
(H) mRNA zonation pattern in Visium highly multiplexed protein analysis and VSIG4-ADT expression pattern (left) and zonated expression patterns of indicated antibodies (right). 
 
(I) MICS analysis of indicated proteins. 
 
(J) Molecular Cartography of indicated genes and cell types. 
 
(K) mRNA (Xcr1, Flt3l, Mafb, and Clec10a) and protein (MHCII and F4/80) expression in the same tissue slice. Scale bars, 50 mm. PV, portal vein; CV, central vein. Arrows indicate specific cell types, colors correspond to cell type/markers. Images are representative of 2-4 mice. See also Figure S2 and Tables S1, S2, S3, and S5. 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (2MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure S2. Combination of CITE-seq, scRNA-seq, snRNA-seq, and spatial analyses enables identification of all hepatic cell types including bona fide cell doublets, related to Figure 1 
 
(A and B) Top DEGs (A) and DEPs (B) for cell types from Figure 1B. 
 
(C) Distinct profiles of cells or nuclei within the UMAP depending on isolation protocols; 71,162 cells from ex vivo digestions, 96,066 cells from in vivo digestions, and 18,666 nuclei. Numbers on plots represent numbers of cells/nuclei per population. 
 
(D) Correlation plots showing genes captured within the KC, B cell and neutrophil populations with and without addition of CITE-seq antibodies. 
 
(E) Expression of VSIG4, CD206, and ESAM (protein, top) and Vsig4, Mrc1, and Esam (mRNA, bottom). 
 
(F) UMAP showing clusters of cells when only minimal QC for gene number and % mitochondrial genes is performed; 17,669 cells pooled from 3 samples. Expression of Cd5l, Cd19, and Kdr by the clusters facilitating identification of cell types per annotation. 
 
(G) CITE-seq data from (F) in Flow-Jo showing expression of CD206 and ESAM in total KCs (left) and total B cells (middle). Numbers represent % of entire KC or B cell population. Identified populations were then mapped back onto the original UMAP (right). 
 
(H) Expression of CD31, CD26, and CD38 by indicated populations. 
 
(I) Heatmaps showing expression of top DEGs between KC1s and LSECs (left), KC2s and KC1s + LSECs (middle) and B cell2s and B cell1s + LSECs (right). 
 
(J) 3D reconstruction of murine liver following perfusion with antigen fix to inflate endothelial cells and staining with antibodies against CD31, CD206, and F4/80. 
 
(K) UMAP showing clusters generated from Visium analysis of liver tissue (4 samples) and liver capsule (1 sample). 
 
(L) Top unbiased genes defining zonation trajectory from portal to central vein in Visium. 
 
(M) Expression of Glul and Epcam by confocal microscopy (left), annotation of portal, periportal, mid, and central regions on same tissue section (middle) and overlay of both datasets (right). 
 
(N) Identification of cholangiocyte (left) and cDC (right) signatures on zonated Visium spots. 
 
(P) Molecular Cartography showing expression of indicated zonated hepatocyte mRNAs in liver tissue. Data are representative of 2 mice. 
 
(O) Expression of Itgae (encoding CD103) in the UMAP of the total liver (left) and flow cytometric analysis of total cDC1s for CD103 and MHCII expression in the healthy murine liver (right). 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (3MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure 2. A population of macrophages reside around the bile duct in the healthy murine liver 
 
(A) UMAP of murine myeloid cells (71,261 cells/nuclei) isolated from Figure 1B and re-clustered with TotalVI. 
 
(B and C) Top DEGs (B) and DEPs (C) between cell types. 
 
(D) Expression of Gpnmb and Cd207. 
 
(E) Expression of VSIG4 and F4/80 (left) or MHCII, CD11c, and DAPI (right) by confocal microscopy. Capsule macs identified by white arrows. Scale bars, 50 mm. 
 
(F) Molecular Cartography of indicated genes at liver capsule. 
 
(G) Expression of VSIG4, F4/80, GLUL, and DAPI (left) or F4/80 or CCR2 (right, inset) by confocal microscopy. Scale bars, 100 mm. 
 
(H) Molecular Cartography of indicated genes at portal triad. PV, portal vein; CV, central vein; HA, hepatic artery; BD, bile duct. Arrows indicate specific cell types, where color corresponds to markers. Images are representative of 2-4 mice. 
 
(I and J) Top GO terms for KCs (I) and bile-duct LAMs (J). 
 
(K) Representative image showing expression of VSIG4 (red) CD19 (yellow) and CD3E (magenta) by MICS analysis (left) and % of B or T cells found with/without a KC per field of view (right). Data are pooled from multiple fields of view in 2 mice. ^(***)p < 0.001 Student's t test. 
 
(L) Mice (29-week-old) were treated with 3.5 mg/kg LPS or PBS and 2 h later, livers were harvested without the capsule. KCs and LAMs were FACS-purified and expression of Il1b, Tnf, IL10, and Il18 was examined by qPCR, compared with b-actin. ^(*)p < 0.05, ^(**)p < 0.01, ^(***)p < 0.001, ^(****)p < 0.0001, one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test. See also Figure S3 and Table S2. 
 
Distinct spatial orientation of hepatic myeloid cell subsets 
 
To locate the cells identified we performed spatial transcriptomics analysis using Visium. For this, we cut the liver in two distinct orientations to profile both the liver tissue and the capsule (Figures 1C and S2K). We ordered each Visium spot along a spatial trajectory, and annotated portal, periportal, mid, and central zones based on known hepatocyte zonation markers (Halpern et al., 2017; Figures 1D, 1E, and S2L) and confirmed this annotation using confocal microscopy (Figure S2M). By using the reference sc/snRNA-seq data, we then deconvolved each spot into its constituent cell types and investigated how cell abundance changed with zonation (Figures 1F, 1G, and S2N). Validating this approach, cholangiocytes mapped specifically to the portal zones (Aizarani et al., 2019), while KCs were preferentially located in periportal and mid zones (Bonnardel et al., 2019; Gola et al., 2021). While KC location is zonated, we did not identify a strong zonation pattern in the gene expression profiles of KCs (data not shown). We further identified B cells, T cells, endothelial cells (ECs), and stromal cells (SCs) across all zones, while conventional dendritic cells (cDCs) were found at the portal vein (PV), with a minor presence at the central vein (CV) (Figures 1F, 1G, and S2N). 
 
To validate these locations at single-cell resolution, we next sought to identify the best cell-specific surface markers that would also work by confocal microscopy. As the fixation step utilized for confocal microscopy often affects the integrity of protein epitopes, it is not possible to predict which antibodies will work spatially on fixed tissue slices. Therefore, to simultaneously screen multiple antibodies to identify those working by microscopy, we performed a second Visium analysis which we complemented with 100 oligo-conjugated antibodies, chosen based on the CITE-seq results (Figure 1H). The antibodies identified to work spatially were then validated at single-cell resolution, using MACSima(tm) Imaging Cyclic Staining (MICS) technology and a 60-plex antibody panel (Figure 1I). Unfortunately, we could not identify useful surface markers for all populations. For example, we did not identify enough discriminatory surface markers that worked by confocal microscopy to distinguish the cDC subsets. Notably, while CD103 has previously been proposed to distinguish hepatic cDC1s from cDC2s (Eckert et al., 2015), our data demonstrate that this is only expressed by a fraction of these cells (Figure S2O). To confirm the locations of the cDC subsets, we thus turned to Molecular Cartography(tm) (Resolve BioSciences) that allows for 100-plex spatial mRNA analysis. Genes were selected based on the DEGs from the sc/snRNA-seq data that were also spatially resolved according to Visium. We also identified the portal-central trajectory in this dataset using cholangiocytes genes (Epcam and Spp1) and known zonated hepatocyte genes (Glul, Cyp2e1, Hal, and Sds; Figure S2P). Using expression of Xcr1, Clec9a (cDC1s) and Cd209a, Mgl2, and Clec10a (cDC2s), we confirmed that both cDC1s and cDC2s were localized primarily at the PV (Figure 1J). As cDC2s shared a number of genes with monocyte-derived cells (Figure S2A), we also examined the expression of general monocyte/mac (Cd14, Adgre1, Axl, Mafb, Cx3cr1, and C5ar1) and KC-specific genes (Cd5l and Vsig4) to further validate their identification as bona fide cDC2s (Figure 1J). The punctate nature of mRNA expression in these analyses combined with the dendritic shape of myeloid cells renders it difficult to convincingly determine cell boundaries and to conclude these cDC2s and macs were distinct cells. To validate this, we therefore developed a protocol that combines mRNA detection (RNAScope) with surface protein detection. Examining expression of cDC- or mac-specific mRNAs combined with protein surface markers confirmed the presence of PV cDC1, cDC2s, and non-KC macs (Figure 1K). Taken together, by combining multiple spatial transcriptomic and proteomic approaches, we located all the cells within the murine liver and identified additional heterogeneity within the myeloid cells, not revealed when examining the sc/sn-RNA-seq dataset in isolation. This highlights the power of combining single-cell and spatial proteogenomic techniques to investigate cellular heterogeneity. 
 
Refined analysis of myeloid cells identifies three subsets of hepatic macrophages 
 
To better understand the non-KC macs, we zoomed in on myeloid cells (cDCs, KCs, monocytes, and monocyte-derived cells) in our sc/snRNA-seq analysis defining 11 populations (Figures 2A-2C; Table S2). This included KCs, 3 populations of non-KC macs and cells that had a profile intermediate between monocytes and patrolling monocytes or macs, termed transitioning monocytes. Closer inspection of the non-KC macs identified cluster6 as peritoneal macs (Figure 2B). The DEGs between the remaining populations suggested that cluster7 likely resembles capsule macs (Sierro et al., 2017), expressing Cd207 and Cx3cr1 while cluster8 resembles Gpnmb+Spp1+ lipid-associated macrophages (LAMs) we recently described in the fatty liver (Remmerie et al., 2020; Figures 2A-2D). Conversion of the CITE-seq data into an FCS file allowed an in silico gating strategy to be defined (Figure S3A). Validating this, we utilized the strategy to FACS-purify the populations and assess gene expression (Figures S3B-S3D). Fitting with a recent report (Jin et al., 2021), washing the liver prior to digestion enriched the peritoneal macs in the wash fraction, demonstrating these were contaminants on the liver surface rather than being present in the liver tissue itself (Figure S3E). While the CITE-seq markers did not discriminate between cluster7 and cluster8, adding CD207 to the panel enabled the non-KCs to be divided into CD207+ and CD207- macs (Figure S3F). Fitting with their designation as capsule macs, the relative abundance of CD207+ macs was increased if we dissected and digested the capsule (Figure S3F). However, although Molecular Cartography confirmed the presence of Cd207+ macs in the capsule, it also revealed Cd207+ macs at the CV, which were rarely found at the PV (Figures 2E-2H and S3G-S3J). Thus, cluster7 consists of both capsule and CV CD207+ macs. This finding further demonstrates the need for spatial approaches to confirm cell identities. Molecular Cartography also identified macs at the PVs and CVs expressing Ccr2 and Chil3 (Figures 2G, 2H, S3H, and S3J), resembling transitioning monocytes (cluster11). Finally, a population of Gpnmb-expressing macs were found to be enriched around the bile ducts (Figures 2G, 2H, S3H, S3K, and S3L). As Gpnmb expression is cluster8 specific (Figure 2B), and these cells resemble LAMs (Remmerie et al., 2020), we termed these cells bile-duct LAMs. 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (3MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure S3. Validated flow cytometry gating strategy for murine myeloid cells, related to Figure 2 
 
(A) CITE-seq data from the murine myeloid cells in Figure 2A were exported as an FCS file and an in silico gating strategy identified in FlowJo software. 
 
(B) Application of the in silico gating strategy with a 21-color flow cytometry panel. Myeloid cells were pre-gated as live CD45+ lineage cells (Ly6G-CD19-NK1.1-B220-CD3-). Data are representative of 3 experiments with 3-6 mice per experiment. 
 
(C) cDC1s, cDC2s, migratory cDCs (Mig. cDCs), peritoneal macs (Peri. Macs), KCs, and non-KC macs (non-KCs) were FACS-purified using gating strategy in (B), mRNA was isolated and qPCR performed to examine expression of indicated genes defining each population to validate their identity. Data are representative of 2 experiments with n = 3-6. 
 
(D) Putative peritoneal macs were FACS-purified using gating strategy in (B) and expression of Gata6 was examined by qPCR compared with other hepatic myeloid populations. Data are from a single experiment with n = 6. 
 
(E) Peritoneal macs as a % of total macs recovered from the liver using different digestion techniques (in vivo, ex vivo, or capsule) or in supernatants in which livers were washed following removal from the mouse but prior to digestion (wash). Data are from a single experiment with n = 4. ^(*)p < 0.05, ^(**)p < 0.01 one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test compared with wash data. 
 
(F) Expression of CD14 and CD207 within the non-KC mac population from (B) (left) and % of CD207+ and CD207- populations among total macs in livers digested using the ex vivo or in vivo protocols or in dissected and digested liver capsule (right). Data are representative of two experiments with n = 4-5 mice per experiment. ^(****)p < 0.0001 mixed effects analysis with Tukey's multiple comparison test. 
 
(G) Expression of VSIG4, F4/80, GLUL, and DAPI by confocal microscopy. Insets represent zones featured in Figures 2E, 2G, and S3I. 
 
(H) Molecular Cartography of indicated genes and cell types. Insets represent zones featured in Figures 2F, 2H, and S3J. 
 
(I) Expression of VSIG4, F4/80, GLUL, and DAPI by confocal microscopy at the central vein. Scale bars, 50 mm. 
 
(J) Molecular Cartography of indicated genes and cell types at central vein. 
 
(K) Expression of F4/80, EPCAM, CCR2, GPNMB, and DAPI by confocal microscopy at a portal vein (top) or F4/80 or GPNMB alone (bottom). Scale bars, 25 mm. 
 
(L) Quantification of % of Gpnmb & Trem2 counts over Adgre1 counts in indicated regions of tissue as assessed using Molecular Cartography data. Each dot represents an individual region. ^(*)p < 0.05, ^(****)p > 0.0001 one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test. 
 
(M) Expression of DESMIN and F4/80 at the liver capsule and underlying parenchyma (left) or EPCAM, DESMIN and F4/80 at the bile duct by confocal microscopy. PV, portal vein; CV, central vein; HA, hepatic artery; BD, bile duct. Arrows indicate specific cell types, where color corresponds to cell type/markers. All images are representative of 2-6 mice. 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (3MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure S4. Protein markers of murine CD45- cell subsets, related to Figure 3 
 
(A) CITE-seq data from the murine CD45- cells in Figure 3A were exported as an FCS file and an in silico gating strategy identified in FlowJo. 
 
(B) Gated cell overlay of populations identified using strategy in (A). 
 
(C) Expression of CD90, CD204, CD73, and CD29 markers by indicated cell types. 
 
(D) Expression of indicated protein markers in 60-plex MICS analysis in endothelial cells. 
 
(E) Expression of DESMIN, EPCAM, LYVE1, and CD31 at a portal triad (left) with inset (right). 
 
(F) Expression of indicated protein markers in 60-plex MICS analysis in stromal cells. 
 
(G) Molecular Cartography of indicated genes and cell types at portal vein. PV, portal vein; CV, central vein. Arrows indicate specific cell types, where color corresponds to cell type/markers. All images are representative of 2-6 mice. 
 
KCs and LAMs are functionally distinct in the homeostatic murine liver 
 
We next sought to investigate the differences between KCs and LAMs. Analysis of GO terms associated with biological processes for these cells suggested that KCs may play a role in regulating humoral responses, while LAMs were more broadly associated with immune responses (Figures 2I and 2J). Consistent with this, in the 100-plex protein microscopy data we noted that a significant proportion of the B cells present were interacting with KCs, which was not observed with T cells (Figure 2K). This suggests cross-talk between these two populations, potentially linked to the high expression of the B cell chemokine Cxcl13 by murine KCs (Table S2). To assess the inflammatory nature of LAMs compared with KCs, we FACS-purified the cells and performed qPCR analysis to examine expression of various cytokines. To enable LAM purification, we eliminated the capsule prior to digesting the tissue. Fitting with the GO analysis, LAMs expressed more Il1b at steady state compared with KCs (Figure 2L). However, despite this, upon in vivo TLR4 stimulation, they were less responsive than KCs, both in terms of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines (Figure 2L), possibly indicative of LPS tolerance. This may result from their location at the PV and hence exposure to blood from the intestine, although this remains to be tested. Taken together this highlights the distinct nature and functions of these cells; however, further research is required to determine the precise roles of these cells. 
 
Macrophage subsets reside in distinct spatial niches 
 
As all the mac populations are in close contact with CD45- cells in their local environment (Bonnardel et al., 2019; Figure S3M), we further analyzed the CD45- cells, identifying multiple subsets of ECs and SCs and a gating strategy to distinguish them (Figures 3A-3C and S4A-S4C; Table S3). ECs could be further subdivided into 4 distinct clusters and analysis of their locations allowed them to be identified as CV ECs (cluster10), LSECs (cluster9), PV ECs (cluster11), and lymphatic ECs (LECs; cluster12) (Figures 3D, 3E, S4D, and S4E). As Visium found fibroblasts at both the PVs and CVs (Figure 3D), and as a previous report has suggested the presence of distinct subsets within these cells (Dobie et al., 2019), we further zoomed in on the SCs to better assess their heterogeneity (Figures 3F, 3G, S4A-S4C, and S4F; Table S4). This revealed subsets of mesothelial cells and fibroblasts restricted to the capsule (Figures 3H and 3I). Myh11+ vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) were localized around hepatic arteries, PVs and CVs (Figures 3F-3H, 3J, and S4G) and Mfap4+Svep1+Clic5-Reln- fibroblasts were found to be CV fibroblasts (Figures 3G, 3H, 3J, and S4G). Finally, we identified a subset of Clic5+Reln+ fibroblasts (cluster3), which were localized around the cholangiocytes, that we termed bile-duct fibroblasts (Figures 3J and S4G). Taken together, the presence of these spatially distinct subsets of ECs and SCs highlights the uniqueness of the specific microenvironments in which the distinct mac populations reside. 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (3MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure 3. Hepatic macrophage populations reside in distinct niches 
 
(A) UMAP of murine CD45- cells (83,410 cells/nuclei) isolated from Figure 1B and re-clustered with TotalVI. 
 
(B and C) Top DEGs (B) and DEPs (C) between cell types. 
 
(D) Indicated cell signatures from sc/snRNA-seq mapped onto the Visium zonation data. 
 
(E) Molecular Cartography of indicated genes at central vein (left) and 2 different portal triads (center and right). 
 
(F) UMAP of murine stromal cells (5,430 cells/nuclei) isolated from the UMAP in Figure 3A and re-clustered with scVI. 
 
(G) Top DEGs between different cell types identified. 
 
(H) Identification of mesothelial cell (top) and VSMC (bottom) signatures on zonated Visium data. 
 
(I and J) Molecular Cartography of indicated genes at the liver capsule (I) or the central vein (J; left) and portal triad (J; right). PV, portal vein; CV, central vein; HA, hepatic artery; BD, bile duct. Arrows indicate specific cell types, where color corresponds to markers. Images are representative of 2-4 mice. See also Figure S4 and Tables S3 and S4. 
 
An in silico gating strategy for murine hepatic lymphoid cells 
 
Finally, in addition to providing gating strategies for myeloid and CD45- cells, we also wanted to investigate if the CITE-seq data would allow us to develop similar strategies for the lymphoid populations. To examine this, we re-clustered the T cells, NK cells, ILCs, B cells, and pDCs from Figure 1B identifying 12 distinct populations (Figure S5A). Analysis of the DEGs highlighted that while B cells, NK cells, ILC1s, and pDCs were distinct populations, there was considerable overlap between the transcriptomic profiles of the T cells (Figure S5B; Table S5). However, by analyzing the DEPs we were able to define distinct subsets including naive CD4 and CD8 T cells, T_(Regs), T_(H)1s, CTLs, and T_(H)17s (Figures S5A and S5C; Table S5). Moreover, we were able to design a gating strategy to isolate the distinct populations (Figure S5D). 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (1MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure S5. Combination of CITE-seq, scRNA-seq, snRNA-seq, and spatial analyses enables generation of a human liver atlas, related to Figure 4 
 
(A) Murine lymphoid cells (B cells, T cells, NK cells, ILC1s, pDCs; 27,398 cells) were isolated from Figure 1B and re-clustered with TotalVI. 
 
(B and C) Top DEGs (B) and DEPs (C) for the cell types from Figure S5A. 
 
(D) CITE-seq data from Figure S5A were exported as an FCS file and an in silico gating strategy identified in FlowJo. 
 
(E) Human lymphoid cells (B cells, T cells, NK cells, ILC1s, pDCs; 105,790 cells) were isolated from Figure 4B and re-clustered with TotalVI. 
 
(F and G) Top DEGs (F) and DEPs (G) for the cell types from Figure S5E. 
 
(H) CITE-seq data from Figure S5E were exported as an FCS file and an in silico gating strategy identified in FlowJo. 
 
(I) Proportion of indicated cell types arising from patients with <10% (purple) or >10% steatosis (yellow). 
 
(J) Hepatic cells were isolated from 22 C57B/l6 mice fed either a standard diet (SD) or a western diet (WD) for 24 or 36 weeks to induce NAFLD and NASH by ex vivo (10 samples) or in vivo (12 samples) enzymatic digestion. Alternatively, livers were snap frozen and nuclei isolated by tissue homogenization (14 samples). Live cells/intact nuclei were purified using FACS. For cells, total live, live CD45+, live CD45-, live hepatocytes or myeloid cells (live CD45+, CD3-, CD19-, B220-, NK1.1-) were sorted. 10 samples were also stained with a panel of 107-161 barcode-labeled antibodies for CITE-seq analysis. All datasets were pooled together and after QC 121,980 cells/nuclei were clustered using TotalVI. 
 
(K) Murine lymphoid cells (B cells, T cells, NK cells, ILC1s, pDCs; 21,322 cells) from mice fed the SD or WD for 24 or 36 weeks were isolated from Figure S5J and re-clustered with TotalVI. 
 
(L) Proportion of indicated cell types arising from mice fed the SD (purple) or WD (yellow). 
 
(M) Top DEGs between CTLs isolated from mice fed the SD (purple) or WD (yellow). 
 
A practical proteogenomic atlas of the healthy human liver 
 
To determine the degree of conservation between the mac subsets and their different microenvironmental niches between the mouse and the human liver, we next generated a proteogenomic atlas of the human liver using sc/snRNA-seq and CITE-seq on 19 liver biopsies (Figures 4A, 4B, S6A, and S6B; Tables S1 and S5). Of these, most were histologically healthy with only 5 patients showing >10% hepatic steatosis in the absence of any significant fibrosis (Table S6). Cellular proportions varied according to the isolation technique used, and while there was some variability between patients, this was not linked to the surgery (Figures S6C-S6E). Further confirming the lack of fibrosis in the steatotic livers, we did not detect any increase in CTLs (Figures S5E-S5I; Table S5), which have been shown to correlate with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) (Haas et al., 2019). A significant increase in CTLs was detected in the setting of murine NASH induced by feeding a western diet (WD) for up to 36 weeks, demonstrating that this is not due a limitation in detecting these differences using CITE-seq (Figures S5J-S5M; Table S7). As Visium reliably located murine hepatic cells, we used this to locate the cells of the human liver in 4 biopsies (Figure 4C). However, the Visium spots from patients with >10% steatosis were found to cluster separately from the healthy samples (<10% steatosis; Figures 4D and 4E). We therefore used the healthy samples to calculate a baseline zonation and then transferred this trajectory onto the steatotic samples (Figures 4F and S6F). This identified the steatosis to be predominantly present in regions expressing peri-central zonation genes like CYP2E1. This zonation pattern was further validated using Molecular Cartography (Figure S6G). This fits with previous clinical studies demonstrating peri-central steatosis to be most common in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) patients, especially in early disease (Chalasani et al., 2008; Kleiner and Makhlouf, 2016). However, as these peri-central regions are larger than in the healthy controls, it could also imply that the presence of steatosis alters expression of the zonated hepatocyte genes, but this remains to be tested. Notably, the overall cellular distribution was not impacted by the presence of steatosis, although neutrophils and monocytes and monocyte-derived cells were preferentially localized peri-centrally in the steatotic patients correlating with the presence of steatosis (Figure 4G). MICS 100-plex protein analysis further validated the cellular distributions predicted by Visium and confirmed the increase in neutrophils in the steatotic livers (Figures S6H and S6I). 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (3MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure 4. Identification of bona fide Kupffer cells across species 
 
(A) Cells/nuclei were isolated from liver biopsies (~1-2 mm3; 14 cells, 5 nuclei) from patients undergoing either liver resection, cholecystectomy or gastric bypass. Live cells/intact nuclei were FACS-purified. Either total live, live CD45+, and live CD45- or live CD45+, CD3-, and CD19- cells were sorted. 7 cell samples were stained with a panel of 198 barcode-labeled antibodies for CITE-seq analysis. All datasets were pooled together and after QC, 167,598 cells/nuclei were analyzed using TotalVI. 
 
(B) UMAP of sc/snRNA-seq data. 
 
(C) UMAP of Visium data from 4 patient biopsy samples. 
 
(D) Split of Visium spots based on % steatosis. 
 
(E) Healthy and steatotic Visium liver tissue with clusters overlaid and H+E staining to identify steatotic zones. 
 
(F) Zonation of Visium data (top) with zonation pattern mapped onto liver tissue (bottom). 
 
(G) Indicated cell signatures from sc/snRNA-seq mapped onto Visium zonation trajectory, healthy (top), steatotic (bottom). 
 
(H) Myeloid cells (40,821 cells) were isolated from Figure 4B and re-clustered with TotalVI. 
 
(I) Expression of VSIG4 protein (top) and CD5L mRNA (bottom). 
 
(J) Expression of VSIG4, F4/80, FOLRB, and GLUL combined with Cd5l/CD5L on murine (left) and human (H25; right) livers. Scale bars, 50 mm. Inset in bottom panels. Scale bars, 20 mm. Images are representative of 2-4 livers. 
 
(K) Livers (2/species) were isolated from healthy macaque, pig, chicken, hamster, and zebrafish. Cells were isolated by ex vivo digestion for CITE-seq (pig; 198 human antibodies) or scRNA-seq (hamster, chicken, and zebrafish), or nuclei were isolated for snRNA-seq (macaque). Total live cells (hamster, chicken, and pig), DsRed+GFP+ cells (zebrafish) or nuclei (macaque) were FACS-purified. Following QC, 8,483 nuclei (macaque) or 21,907 (pig), 5,965 (hamster), 7,457 (chicken), and 4,957 (zebrafish) cells were analyzed using TotalVI (pig) or scVI (macaque, hamster, chicken, and zebrafish) (top). KCs were identified using the human-murine KC signature and the signature finder algorithm (Pont et al., 2019) (bottom). See also Figures S6 and S7 and Tables S1, S2, S3, S5, S6, S8, and S9. 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (2MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure S6. Combination of CITE-seq, scRNA-seq, snRNA-seq, and spatial analyses enables generation of a human liver atlas and identification of bona fide human KCs, related to Figure 4 
 
(A and B) Top DEGs (A) and DEPs (B) for the cell types from Figure 4B. 
 
(C) Distinct profiles of cells or nuclei within the UMAP depending on isolation protocol used; 152,535 cells from ex vivo digestions and 15,063 nuclei. 
 
(D) Proportion of each cell type per patient profiled. 
 
(E) Proportion of indicated cell types as a % of total CD45+ cells calculated from ex vivo digested samples per surgery type. Ch; cholecystectomy, Re; resection, GB; gastric bypass. ^(*)p < 0.05; one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test. 
 
(F) Mapping of Visium UMAP zonation patterns onto tissue sections from patient H35 and H37. 
 
(G) Expression of indicated zonation genes in patients H35-H38 assessed by Molecular Cartography. 
 
(H and I) Expression of indicated proteins by MICS 100-plex protein analysis in the healthy (H) and steatotic (I) human liver. 
 
(J) Murine myeloid cells (cDC1s, cDC2s, Mig. cDCs, Macs, monocytes, and monocyte-derived cells; 42,922 cells) from mice fed the SD or WD for 24 or 36 weeks were isolated from Figure S5J and re-clustered with TotalVI. 
 
(K) Distribution of cells in UMAP originating from SD- (purple) or WD- (yellow) fed mice. 
 
(L) Proportion of indicated cell types arising from mice fed the SD (purple) or WD (yellow). 
 
(M and N) Flow cytometry analysis of indicated cell populations in SD and WD-fed mice (24 weeks). Representative gating strategies (M) and absolute number of indicated populations (N). ^(*)p < 0.05, ^(**)p < 0.01 Student's t test. Data are from 2 independent experiments with n = 5-6 per diet. 
 
(O and P) Top DEGs (O) and DEPs (P) for cell types from Figure 4H. 
 
(Q) Top 25 Murine KC genes as expressed by the human myeloid cell clusters. 
 
(R) Mapping of KC signature onto Visium trajectory for healthy (purple) and steatotic (orange) livers. 
 
(S) Expression of VSIG4 mRNA within human myeloid cells. 
 
(T) Expression of VSIG4 (red) and CD163 (gray, top) or CD169 (gray, bottom) by MICS analysis in healthy human liver. 
 
(U) Representative images showing KC location (red) as assessed by MICS analysis in the healthy (left) and steatotic (right) human liver. PV, portal vein; CV, central Vein, dashed line indicates zones of steatosis. 
 
(V) Representative image of CD68 and CD163 staining in 10-15-year-old human liver paraffin sections. Image is representative of 6 different patients. 
 
(W) In silico gating strategy to isolate distinct myeloid cell populations identified from CITE-seq data. 
 
(X) Expression of VSIG4 and FOLR2 by live CD45+ cells also expressing CD14 in indicated human liver biopsies by flow cytometry. Data are representative of 21 biopsy samples analyzed. 
 
Evolutionarily conserved transcriptomic and proteomic identity of KCs 
 
To date, no validated markers of bona fide human KCs have been described. Explaining the difficulty to accurately define human KCs, we found monocytes and macs formed a single continuum in the human sc/snRNA-seq data, preventing a simple definition of human KCs (Figure 4B). Notably, a similar continuum from monocyte to KCs was also observed in the NASH murine liver (Figures S5J and S6J-S6N, Table S8). Consistent with our previous report (Remmerie et al., 2020), we observed both long-term resident Timd4-expressing KCs and recently recruited Timd4- monocyte-derived KCs (moKCs; Figures S6J-S6N). As the presence of such a continuum in the human liver suggests that there may also be monocyte contribution to the KC pool in the healthy human liver, we next zoomed in on myeloid cells to examine this, identifying 10 clusters (Figures 4H, S6O, and S6P; Table S2). To define the KCs, we examined expression of the top 25 murine KC genes by these clusters, which identified cluster10 to be the genuine human KCs (Figure S6Q). Unlike in mice, these were preferentially located in the mid zone (Figure S6R). Cluster9 also expressed many of these genes but lacked TIMD4 (Figure S6Q), suggesting that these cells may be recently recruited moKCs. The presence of moKCs in the liver is consistent with reports that host-derived macs are identified in transplanted donor livers (Bittmann et al., 2003; Pallett et al., 2020) and suggests that the KC population may be a mix of embryonic and monocyte-derived cells. Although not the case at mRNA level, VSIG4 was found to be the best human KC protein marker in the CITE-seq data, while FOLR2, CD163, and CD169 were also identified as useful markers of these cells for flow cytometry and confocal microscopy on frozen and paraffin sections (Figures 4I and S6S-S6X). Co-staining human livers for VSIG4 protein and KC-specific CD5L mRNA and MICS 100-plex protein analysis also confirmed the mid-zonal localization of KCs (Figures 4J and S6U). To assess if KC identity was further conserved in evolution, we profiled macaque, pig, hamster, chicken, and zebrafish livers (Figure 4K). We identified the KCs in an unbiased manner by mapping the conserved human-mouse KC signature onto the datasets (Figures 4K and S7A-S7C). We then examined the main features of each KC population identified (Figures S7D-S7H; Table S9). A strong overlap in transcriptomes across species was observed likely due to the conserved expression of core KC transcription factors (Figure S7I). However, each species also harbored a number of unique KC genes (Figure S7J; Table S9). VSIG4 protein expression was also conserved in pig and macaque KCs (Figures S7K-S7M). Similarly, we were also able to identify most of the other hepatic cells across species on the basis of conserved genes (Figures S7N and S7O). cDC2s were the main exception to this, as specific cDC2 marker genes were not conserved across all species (Figure S7O). 
 
LAM location is altered in the steatotic liver 
 
Alongside KCs, we also identified distinct clusters of macs in the human myeloid cells (Figure 4H). To better understand the nature of these clusters we performed confocal microscopy to examine the specific locations of CD68+VSIG4- macs in the human liver (Figure S8A). This identified CD68+VSIG4- macs in the liver capsule, in close proximity to central and PVs as well as at bile ducts (BDs) (Figures 5A-5C and S8A). Similar populations were also observed at the PVs and CVs and at the BDs in the healthy macaque liver (Figure S7M). Examination of the scRNA-seq data and comparison with murine signatures identified immature and mature LAMs, with immature LAMs expressing some monocyte genes (Figures 4H, 5D, S8B, and S8C). Although recently suggested to be specific to fibrotic human livers (Ramachandran et al., 2019), we identified LAMs in all patients profiled with scRNA-seq, but there was a trend toward increased proportions of LAMs in the livers with >10% steatosis (Figure S8D) consistent with the increased population of LAMs in murine NAFLD (Figures S6J-S6N). As in the healthy mouse, Visium identified human LAMs in portal zones of non-steatotic livers. However, in steatotic human livers, LAMs were primarily located peri-centrally, in zones with steatosis (Figure 5E), suggesting that monocytes are recruited to distinct locations in the healthy and obese liver where they then differentiate into LAMs. This altered location of LAMs was further validated by confocal microscopy and Molecular Cartography (Figures 5F-5H). However, this analysis did not identify any capsule macs, suggesting that these cells may be absent from our UMAP, likely as a result of the small amount of capsule tissue on a biopsy. The Mac1 population expressing IGSF21 was present in very low numbers throughput the tissue (Figures 5G and 5H). This coupled with their similar transcriptomic profile to moKCs could suggest that these are moKC precursors as observed in the mouse, but this requires further study. Focusing on the LAMs, the change in their location in the steatotic human liver was also observed in the murine NAFLD model. Here, LAMs were found across portal, periportal, and mid zones (Figures 5I, S8E, and S8F), fitting with the presence of steatosis in these regions and consistent with our previous report (Remmerie et al., 2020). Comparison of DEGs between LAMs in standard diet (SD) and WD-fed mice identified that LAMs had a more mature phenotype in WD-fed mice, downregulating their expression of some monocyte genes and increasing their expression of prototypical mac markers, consistent with the presence of both immature and mature LAMs in the human liver (Figure 5J). Fitting with a more mature phenotype, WD-derived LAMs also expressed lower levels of Il1b, Tnf, and Il10 compared with SD LAMs (Figure 5K). While further studies are required to assess the precise functions of these cells in NAFLD, this could further suggest a protective rather than a pathogenic role for LAMs (Daemen et al., 2021). 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (2MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure S7. Conserved and unique features of KCs across species, related to Figure 4 
 
(A and B) Expression of human-murine KC signature genes across cell types in mouse (A) and human (B). 
 
(C) Unbiased identification of KCs in mouse and human using the human-murine KC signature and the signature finder algorithm (Pont et al., 2019). 
 
(D-H) Annotated UMAPs from indicated species and expression of top KC-specific genes compared with other cells per species. 
 
(I) Expression of previously identified core murine transcription factors (Bonnardel et al., 2019) by KCs across species. 
 
(J) Venn diagram showing convergence and divergence of expression of top 50 KC genes per species across species, see Table S9 for genes lists per species. 
 
(K) Top DEPs (identified with cross reactive human antibodies) in the pig CITE-seq data. 
 
(L) Expression of VSIG4 in the porcine liver by confocal microscopy. 
 
(M) Expression of VSIG4, CD68 (protein), and CD5L (mRNA) in macaque liver. PV, portal vein; HA, hepatic artery; BD, bile duct. All images are representative of 2 livers. 
 
(N and O) Conserved expression of indicated genes across CD45- (N) and CD45+ (O) cell types and species. 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (3MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure 5. LAMs are found at the bile duct in the healthy liver, but at zones of steatosis in the obese liver 
 
(A) Expression of indicated markers at the capsule of the healthy human liver (H14) by confocal microscopy. Scale bars, 20 mm. Arrowheads indicate capsule macs. 
 
(B and C) Representative images showing expression of indicated markers at the portal triad by confocal microscopy. Insets on right. Scale bars, 100 mm. Insets scale bars, 50 mm (B). Scale bars, 150 mm. Insets scale bars, 75 mm (C). 
 
(D) Human bile-duct LAMs identified using the murine bile-duct LAM gene signature and the signature finder algorithm (Pont et al., 2019). 
 
(E) Human LAM signature from scRNA-seq mapped onto the Visium zonation data, healthy (purple), steatotic (yellow). 
 
(F) Expression of indicated markers by confocal microscopy. Insets on right. Scale bars, 150 mm. Insets scale bars, 75 mm. 
 
(G and H) Expression of indicated genes in healthy (G) and steatotic (H) human liver. Insets on right. Images are representative of 2 patients per condition. 
 
(I) Mice were fed a western diet (WD) or standard diet (SD) for 36 weeks to induce NAFLD and Visium analysis was performed. Analysis is pooled from 1 liver slice from the SD condition and 3 liver slices from the WD condition. Zonation pattern and H&E staining (left) and LAM and KC location (right). 
 
(J) Heatmap showing DEGs between LAMs from SD (purple) and WD (yellow) fed mice (24 + 36 weeks pooled). 
 
(K) LAMs were FACS-purified from the liver of mice fed the SD or WD for 24 weeks (with removal of capsule prior to digestion), RNA was isolated and expression of indicated genes was assessed by qPCR relative to b-actin. ^(*)p < 0.05, ^(****)p < 0.0001, Student's t test. Data are pooled from 2 independent experiments with n = 7-10 mice per group. Images from (A-C and F) are representative of 4-5 patients per condition. PV, portal vein; CV, central vein. See also Figure S8 and Table S2. 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (2MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure S8. Evolutionarily conserved signals regulate LAM and KC development, related to Figures 5 and 7 
 
(A) Confocal microscopy of healthy human liver showing expression of indicated markers. Scale bars, 200 mm. 
 
(B and C) Expression of conserved human-murine bile-duct LAM signature in human (B) and mouse (C) hepatic myeloid cells. 
 
(D) Proportion of indicated myeloid cell populations as a % of total myeloid cells in human liver biopsies profiled by scRNA-seq when divided based on presence of steatosis. 
 
(E) Mice were fed a western diet (WD) or standard diet (SD) for 36 weeks to induce NAFLD and Visium analysis was performed. Analysis is pooled from 1 liver slice from the SD condition and 3 liver slices from the WD condition. Shown are cluster and sample annotations. 
 
(F) Zonation of all cell types from Figure S5J in murine NAFLD map (SD&WD). 
 
(G) Differential NicheNet highlighting prioritized conserved (human-mouse) ligand-receptor (LR) pairs between indicated macs and their niche cells. LR pairs are grouped according to the niche cell type with highest ligand expression. 
 
(H) Expression of ALK1 (ACVRL1), BMP9 (GDF2), and BMP10 in human, mouse, and macaque livers where both KCs and stellate cells were profiled. 
 
(I) Livers were harvested from Clec4f-CrexAcvrl1^(fl/fl) mice or Acvrl1^(fl/fl) controls and KCs examined (top) and quantified (middle) using VSIG4 expression. Expression of indicated KC markers by mac populations in Clec4f-CrexAcvrl1^(fl/fl) or Acvrl1^(fl/fl) control mice (bottom). Data are pooled from 2 independent experiments with n = 14 per group. Student's t test. ^(****)p < 0.0001. 
 
(J) Expression of CD31 (ECs), DESMIN (stromal cells), F4/80 (Macs), and EPCAM (cholangiocytes) by confocal microscopy in Fcgr1-CrexAcvrl1^(fl/fl) mice and Acvrl1^(+/+) controls. PV, portal vein; CV, central vein. Images are representative of 2 mice per group. 
 
Potential role for CD45- hepatic cells in determining macrophage localization 
 
Given the altered localization of KCs in the healthy murine versus human liver and LAMs in the healthy versus steatotic liver of mice and humans, we next sought to investigate how the cells of the mac niches differed in these settings. Analysis of CD45- cells in the human liver identified similar (sub)populations of ECs, SCs, and hepatocytes as observed in the healthy mouse liver (Figures 6A and 6B; Table S3). However, while the 100-plex MICS analysis detected a second subset of portal fibroblasts expressing DESMIN (Figure S6H), we did not detect these cells in our UMAP, likely due to difficulties detecting DESMIN with snRNA-seq. No significant differences were found in terms of localization of the identified CD45- cells that could explain the altered location of KCs compared with the mouse (Figures 6C and 6D). With this in mind, we next utilized NicheNet to examine potential ligand-receptor pairs between KCs and CD45- cells present only in the human that could regulate KC location. This analysis identified CCL23 and CCL14 expression by LSECs and CCL16 by hepatocytes that binds to CCR1 expressed by human KCs but not murine KCs (Figure 6E). Crucially, these ligands were preferentially located peri-centrally (Figure 6F) and thus represent interesting targets for further study regarding the potential regulation of KC location in the human liver. 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (3MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure 6. Macrophage niche cells may regulate macrophage locations in healthy versus steatotic liver 
 
(A) UMAP of human CD45- cells (15,481 cells/nuclei) isolated from Figure 4B and re-clustered with scVI. 
 
(B) Top DEGs between cell types identified. 
 
(C) Indicated cell signatures from sc/snRNA-seq mapped onto the Visium zonation data, healthy (top), steatotic (bottom). 
 
(D) Molecular Cartography localizing distinct CD45- cells. 
 
(E) Circos plot showing NicheNet predicted ligand-receptor pairs between KCs and LSECs, HSCs and hepatocytes uniquely expressed in the human liver (left) and UMAPs showing normalized expression of indicated chemokines in the human liver (right) and CCR1/Ccr1 in the human and murine NAFLD liver (bottom). 
 
(F) Zonation of indicated genes in the healthy and steatotic human liver. 
 
(G) UMAP of murine NAFLD (SD and WD) stromal cells (4,025 cells/nuclei) isolated from Figure S5J and re-clustered with scVI (left) and proportions of each cell type in SD- and WD-fed mice (right). 
 
(H) Top DEGs between cell types. 
 
(I) Mice were fed a western diet (WD) or standard diet (SD) for 36 weeks to induce NAFLD, and Visium analysis was performed. Analysis is pooled from 1 liver slice from the SD condition and 3 liver slices from the WD condition. Zonation of Ccl2+ fibroblasts and fibroblasts in SD- and WD-fed mice. See also Tables S3 and S10. 
 
We next aimed to investigate the role of CD45- cells in the regulation of LAM location in the healthy versus steatotic liver. Given the low number of steatotic human samples in our sc/snRNA-seq analysis and the variation between patients, we turned to the murine NASH model to investigate this. Zooming in on SCs (Figure 6G; Table S10), we identified that there was an increase in fibroblasts in the WD-fed mice. There was also a considerable overlap between fibroblasts and HSCs in terms of their gene expression profiles suggesting there may be a differentiation trajectory between the HSCs and the fibroblasts, although this remains to be validated in vivo. We also noted a sub-population of fibroblasts expressing Ccl2, a known ligand for CCR2 which is expressed on monocytes recruited to the liver during NAFLD (Remmerie et al., 2020), as well as Cd44 and Vcam1, two genes involved in monocyte recruitment and adhesion (Johnson and Ruffell, 2009; Meerschaert and Furie, 1995). Both fibroblast populations were enriched in the periportal steatotic regions (Figure 6I), in which we also observe enrichment of the LAMs (Figure 5I). We also found high CCL2 and Cd44 expression in human fibroblasts (Table S3), potentially recruiting bile-duct LAMs. Together, this suggests that fibroblasts may play an important role in recruiting LAMs. 
 
Differential NicheNet analysis across species reveals a crucial role for the ALK1-BMP9/10 axis in KC development 
 
Having identified a potential role for the mac niche cells in regulating mac subset location, we next sought to determine the involvement of these cells in regulating mac phenotypes. To assess the roles of conserved cell-cell interactions in driving mac heterogeneity across species, we performed a differential NicheNet (Browaeys et al., 2019) analysis between the distinct hepatic macs and the CD45- cells present in their respective niches focusing on ligands and receptors conserved in both human and mouse. This revealed very few specific ligand-receptor pairs for LAMs (Figure S8G; data not shown), hinting that local factors such as metabolites rather than unique cell-cell interactions may drive the LAM phenotype. Indeed, this would be consistent with the presence of LAM-like cells in multiple tissues including the obese adipose tissue, the brain, the lung, and the heart (Jaitin et al., 2019; Keren-Shaul et al., 2017; Liao et al., 2020; Rizzo et al., 2020). In line with this, BM monocytes cultured with acetylated low-density lipoprotein expressed LAM-associated genes (Figure 7A), demonstrating a dominant role for lipids in inducing the LAM phenotype. Conversely, for KCs, we found multiple ligand-receptor pairs to be conserved between human and mouse (Figures 7B and S8G). One of these, an activin receptor-like kinase (ALK1)-bone morphogenic protein (BMP)9/10 circuit between KCs (ALK1; encoded by Acvrl1) and stellate cells (BMP)9/10 encoded by Gdf2/Bmp10 respectively) was found to be conserved in all 7 species and was predicted to control the expression of a number of the conserved KC genes (Figures 7B, 7C, and S8H). To validate a role for this axis in KCs, we generated Fcgr1-Cre x Acvrl1^(fl/fl) mice, eliminating ALK1 specifically from CD64-expressing macs (Scott et al., 2018). This led to an almost complete loss of VSIG4+ KCs (Figures 8D-8F), demonstrating that evolutionarily conserved ALK1 signaling is crucial for KCs. To determine if ALK1 is required for KC maintenance we generated Clec4f-Cre x Acvrl1^(fl/fl) mice, eliminating ALK1 only from differentiated KCs (Scott et al., 2018). This revealed a relatively similar phenotype than observed in the Fcgr1-Cre mice, suggesting that ALK1 is also required for KC maintenance (Figure S8I). To directly test the need for ALK1 in KC development, we generated BM chimeras whereby CD45.1 Clec4f-Dtr mice were irradiated with their livers shielded to avoid any radio damage. These mice were then reconstituted with either CD45.2 Acvrl1^(fl/fl) or Fcgr1-CrexAcvrl1^(fl/fl) BM. 4 weeks later, mice were given a single i.p. injection of DT to deplete the KCs and 7 or 13 days thereafter chimerism within the KC population was determined (Figure 7G). We observed that, already by day 7, KO BM-derived cells were almost completely outcompeted by WT BM-derived cells within the KC pool. This was not observed in monocytes but a similar pattern was observed in VSIG4- macs demonstrating that ALK1 is critically required for early KC development (Figure 7H). Finally, while NicheNet predicts that BMP9/10 from stellate cells would signal through ALK1 to induce KC development and maintenance, a prediction in line with our previous NicheNet analysis (Bonnardel et al., 2019), another recent study has suggested that transforming growth factor (TGF)b signaling would be important for KCs (Sakai et al., 2019). This prediction was made on the basis of SMAD4 signaling, which is a common downstream effector of both TGF-b Receptor and ALK1-induced signaling. As TGF-b was also found to participate in an ALK1-TGF-b receptor containing signaling complex (Goumans et al., 2003), we thus examined whether TGF-b signaling is important for KCs. To this end we utilized an ALK1-Fc trap or TGF-b type II receptor (TGFbRII)-Fc trap alongside appropriate isotype controls. ALK1-Fc selectively sequesters BMP9/10 (Desroches-Castan et al., 2021), while TGFbRII-Fc selectively interferes with TGF-b1/TGF-b3 receptor binding (Komesli et al., 2017). Clec4f-Dtr mice were depleted of KCs and simultaneously treated with either receptor-Fc traps or isotype controls and KC development was examined 7 days later (Figure 7I). In line with the chimera study, treatment with ALK1-Fc significantly abrogated KC development; however, blocking TGFb signaling had only a minor effect on the proportion of VSIG4- macs (Figure 7J). Altogether this validates the NicheNet prediction and demonstrates that the evolutionarily conserved ALK1-BMP9/10 axis is crucial for the development and maintenance of KCs. 
 
[] 
 
1. Download: Download high-res image (2MB) 
2. Download: Download full-size image 
 
Figure 7. ALK1-BMP9/10 axis regulates KC development 
 
(A) Mouse BM monocytes were cultured in the presence of CSF1 and indicated concentrations of human ac-LDL, prior to analyzed for expression of indicated genes by qPCR. Data are pooled from 2 experiments. One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test compared with 0 ng/mL. 
 
(B) NicheNet circos plot highlighting conserved ligand-receptor pairs and induced target genes between KCs and indicated niche cells in human and mouse. 
 
(C) Feature plots showing expression of ALK1 (Acvrl1) in human myeloid cells (left) and GDF2/BMP10 in CD45- cells (right). 
 
(D) Livers were harvested from Fcgr1-CrexAcvrl1^(fl/fl) mice or Acvrl1^(fl/fl) or Acvrl1^(+/+) controls and KCs examined (left) and quantified (right) using VSIG4 expression. 
 
(E) Expression of indicated KC markers by mac populations in Fcgr1-CrexAcvrl1^(fl/fl) or Acvrl^(fl/fl) control mice. Data are pooled from 3 independent experiments with n = 9 per group. Student's t test. 
 
(F) Expression of indicated markers in livers of Fcgr1-CrexAcvrl1^(fl/fl) or Acvrl1^(fl/fl) or Acvrl1^(+/+) control mice by confocal microscopy. Scale bars, 50 mm. Images are representative of 2 mice per group. 
 
(G) Schematic of chimera experiment setup. 
 
(H) % chimerism normalized to levels in blood Ly6C^(hi) monocytes in Clec4f-Dtr mice 7 or 13 days after DT administration following partial irradiation and receiving either Acvrl^(fl/fl) or Fcgr1-CrexAcvrl^(fl/fl) BM 4 weeks earlier. Data are pooled from 2 independent experiments with n = 10-12 mice per group. 
 
(I) Schematic of Fc trap experiment setup. 
 
(J) Representative FACS plots showing VSIG4 and CLEC2 expression by total macs. Numbers represent % of total mac population in the indicated gate (left) and % of VSIG4+ and VSIG4- macs among total CD45+ cells in the different treatment conditions. One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test. ^(*)p < 0.05, ^(**)p < 0.01, ^(***)p < 0.001, ^(****)p < 0.0001. See also Figure S8. 
 
Discussion 
 
To generate a practical cellular atlas of any human tissue and unravel the cell-cell circuits essential for the identities of cells inhabiting that tissue, four key pieces of information are required: (1) an inventory of all cells present, (2) the location of the different cells within the tissue to identify interactions between neighboring cells, (3) an alignment between the human and animal models allowing for any predicted cell-cell interactions to be perturbed, and (4) the identification of reliable antibody-based panels for the efficient screening of different patients and/or transgenic animals. Here, by integrating single-cell and spatial transcriptomic and proteomic data, we provide these 4 pieces of information for the liver and uncover evolutionarily conserved microenvironmental circuits controlling the development of hepatic macs. 
 
Unraveling the spatial localization of all hepatic cells, we identify LAMs around the bile ducts in the healthy mouse, human, and macaque liver. However, when steatosis is present, LAMs are preferentially recruited to the steatotic regions of the liver. This spatial information at least partially invalidates the hypothesis that LAM identity is specifically induced by fibrotic SCs (Ramachandran et al., 2019). Rather, our data suggest that LAMs are induced by local lipid exposure. We also provide an alignment of the liver atlas across seven species. This reveals the conserved and unique transcriptomic programs of steady-state KCs and uncovers the spatially restricted and conserved ligand-receptor pairs between KCs and the cells constituting their niche. Underlining the need to first characterize the healthy tissue before attempting to understand how disease perturbs the cells, we identify the DLL-NOTCH interaction to be an evolutionarily conserved cross-talk between homeostatic LSECs and KCs and therefore not unique to hepatocellular carcinoma or fibrosis, as proposed (Ramachandran et al., 2019; Sharma et al., 2020). Similarly, we find that FOLR2 expression is not specific to tumor-associated hepatic macs (Sharma et al., 2020) but is expressed by KCs in the healthy mouse and human liver. Finally, we apply a proteogenomic pipeline starting from broad oligo-conjugated antibody panels for both single-cell and spatial profiling. This is crucial as transcriptomic profiling does not always correspond with the ability to detect proteins by flow cytometry or microscopy. By screening broadly, we identify the best surface markers for the isolation and localization of hepatic macs and their respective niche cells. This allows both the validation of the spatial location at the single-cell level, and the efficient screening of transgenic mouse models for the loss of KCs. Characterization of Fcgr1-CrexAcvrl1^(fl/fl) mice using our defined panel readily demonstrates the cruciality of the ALK1-BMP9/10 axis in KC development emphasizing that mac-stromal-cell cross-talk goes much further than the exchange of growth factors (Guilliams et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2018). Moving forward, applying these relatively cheap antibody panels to large patient cohorts or multiple transgenic mouse models should enable any perturbations disturbing liver homeostasis to be efficiently identified. 
 
Limitations of the study 
 
The current study has two main limitations. First, the analysis of the human liver remains restricted by the number of human patients included (19 patients for the sc/snRNA-seq, 4 patients for Visium, and 15 patients by microscopy). While this study provides markers to cheaply and efficiently screen large patient cohorts allowing this analysis to be extended, given the heterogeneity between patients, multiple studies will need to be integrated in a single analysis if we are to be able to interrogate transcriptomic differences in a particular cell subset related to age, sex, ethnicity, or pathological parameters. Second, this study highlights that more research will be needed to fully characterize human SCs. As we could only retrieve these cells through snRNA-seq this means we have not been able to identify good surface markers through CITE-seq. Additionally, for small populations of fibroblasts we did not recover enough nuclei to truly probe their heterogeneity. Better isolation protocols are required to retrieve and enrich these cells from the human liver in order to run a broad panel of CITE-seq markers to identify the different subsets and their corresponding surface markers. 
 
STARMethods 
 
Key resources table 
 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Antibodies: Flow cytometry/confocal microscopy 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD102-FITC (3C4) Biolegend 105606; RRID: AB_313199[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD103-BV750 (M290) BD Biosciences 747478; RRID: AB_2872154[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD11b-BUV395 (M1/70) BD Biosciences 565976; RRID: AB_2721166[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD11b-BV605 (M1/70) BD Biosciences 563015; RRID: AB_2737951[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal MHCII-BUV805 (M5/114,15,2) BD Biosciences 748844; RRID: AB_2873247[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal MHCII-FITC (M5/114,15,2) Thermo Fisher Scientific 11-5321-85; RRID: AB_465233[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD14-PE Dazzle 594 (Sa14-2) Biolegend 123325; RRID: AB_2721697[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD43-BUV737 (S7) BD Biosciences 612840; RRID: AB_2870162[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal Ly6C-eFluor450 (HK1.4) eBioscience 48-5932-82; RRID: AB_10805519[] 
 
 Armenian Hamster Monoclonal CD11c-PE-Cy7 (N418) eBioscience 25-0114-82; RRID: AB_469590[] 
 
 Armenian Hamster Monoclonal CD11c-Unconjugated (N418) Biolegend 117302; RRID: AB_313771[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD86-BV605 (GL-1) Biolegend 105037; RRID: AB_11204429[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD54-PE (YN1/1.7.4) Biolegend 116107; RRID: AB_313698[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD54-AF488 (YN1/1,7,4) Biolegend 116111; RRID: AB_493494[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD172a-BB630P (P84) BD Customs 624294 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal XCR1 - BV650 (ZET) BioLegend 148220; RRID: AB_2566410[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal Tim4-PerCP-Cy5.5 (RMT4-54) eBioscience 46-5866-82; RRID: AB_2573781[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal VSIG4-PECy7 (NLA14) eBioscience 25-5752-82; RRID: AB_2637431[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD19-PECy5 (1D3) eBioscience 15-0193-82; RRID: AB_657672[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD19-Unconjugated (1D3) BD Biosciences 553783; RRID: AB_395047[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD26-FITC (H194-112) BD Biosciences 559652; RRID: AB_398295[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD38-AF700 (90) eBioscience 56-0381-82; RRID: AB_657740[] 
 
 Armenian Hamster Monoclonal CD3e-PECy5 (145-2C11) TONBO Biosciences 55-0031; RRID: AB_2621815[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD3-Unconjugated (17A2) Bioceros N/A 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD45-BV510 (30-F11) BioLegend 103138; RRID: AB_2563061[] 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal CD45.1-PE (A20) BD Biosciences 553776; RRID: AB_395044[] 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal CD45.1-Unconjugated (A20) Biolegend 110702; RRID: AB_313491[] 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal CD45.2-AF700 (104) eBioscience 56-0454-82; RRID: AB_657752[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD45R-PE-Cy5 (RA3-6B2) BD Biosciences 553091; RRID: AB_394621[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal Ly6G-BUV563 (1A8) BD Biosciences 612921; RRID: AB_2870206[] 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal CD64-BV711 (X54-5/7.1) BioLegend 139311; RRID: AB_2563846[] 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal NK1.1-PECy5 (PK136) BioLegend 108716; RRID: AB_493590[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal Ter119-PECy5 (TER-119) eBioscience 15-5921-82; RRID: AB_468810[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal F4/80-BV785 (BM8) BioLegend 123141; RRID: AB_2563667[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal F4/80-Unconjugated (CI:A3-1) Bio-Rad MCA497R; RRID: AB_323279[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal F4/80-AF594 (BM8) Biolegend 123140; RRID: AB_2563241[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CLEC2-PE (17D9) Biolegend 146104; RRID: AB_2562382[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal FOLRB-PE (10/FR2) Biolegend 153304; RRID: AB_2721344[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal FOLRB-Unconjugated (10/FR2) Biolegend 153302; RRID: AB_2687271[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal SiglecF-BUV395 (E50-2440) BD Biosciences 740280; RRID: AB_2740019[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD207-AF647 Imgenex DDX0362A647; RRID: AB_1148741[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD206-AF647 Biolegend 141712; RRID: AB_10900420[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD326 (EPCAM)-APC (G8.8) eBioscience 17-5791-82; RRID: AB_2716944[] 
 
 Goat Polyclonal Clec4F-Unconjugated R & D Systems AF2784; RRID: AB_2081339[] 
 
 Rat Monoclonal Clec4F-Unconjugated (370901) R & D Systems MAB2784; RRID: AB_2081338[] 
 
 Goat Polyclonal VSIG4-Unconjugated R & D Systems AF4646; RRID: AB_2257239[] 
 
 Goat Polyclonal Lyve1-Unconjugated R&D Systems AF2125; RRID: AB_2297188[] 
 
 Donkey Anti-Goat IgG-AF488 Thermo Fisher Scientific A-11055; RRID: AB_2534102[] 
 
 Donkey Anti-Goat IgG-AF633 Thermo Fisher Scientific A-21082; RRID: AB_2535739[] 
 
 Donkey Anti-Goat IgG-AF647 Thermo Fisher Scientific A-21447; RRID: AB_2535864[] 
 
 Donkey Anti-Rat IgG-Cy3 Jackson ImmunoResearch 712-166-153; RRID: AB_2340669[] 
 
 Donkey Anti-Mouse IgG-AF555 Thermo Fisher Scientific A-31570; RRID: AB_2536180[] 
 
 Donkey Anti-Rabbit IgG-AF647 Thermo Fisher Scientific A-31573; RRID: AB_2536183[] 
 
 Donkey Anti-Rabbit IgG-AF680 Thermo Fisher Scientific A-32802; RRID: AB_2762836[] 
 
 Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG-AF514 Thermo Fisher Scientific A-31558; RRID: AB_2536173[] 
 
 Goat Anti-Hamster IgG-Cy3 Jackson ImmunoResearch 127-165-160; RRID: AB_2338989[] 
 
 Goat Anti-Hamster IgG-AF594 Jackson ImmunoResearch 127-585-160; RRID: AB_2338999[] 
 
 Goat Anti-Rat IgG-AF568 Thermo Fisher Scientific A-11077; RRID: AB_2534121[] 
 
 Goat Anti-Chicken IgY-AF680 Abcam Ab175779; 
 
 Rat Monoclonal CD31-Unconjugated (MEC13.3) BD Biosciences 550274; RRID: AB_393571[] 
 
 Rabbit Polyclonal Desmin-Unconjugated Abcam ab15200; RRID: AB_301744[] 
 
 Rabbit Polyclonal Glutamine Synthetase - Unconjugated Abcam ab73593; RRID: AB-2247588 
 
 Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG-AF514 Thermo Fisher Scientific A-31558; RRID: AB_2536173[] 
 
 Rabbit Monoclonal GPNMB- unconjugated (EPR18226-147) Abcam ab188222; 
 
 Polyclonal Chicken anti-GFP Aves Labs GFP-1010; RRID: AB_2307313[] 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal FOLR2-PE (94b/FOLR2) Biolegend 391704; RRID: AB_2721336[] 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal CD45-APCCy7 (2D1) Biolegend 368516; RRID: AB_2566376[] 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal CD14-PETexasRed (TuK4) Thermo Fisher Scientific MHCD1417; RRID:AB_10373552[] 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal CD1C-Unconjugated (L161) Biolegend 331502; RRID:AB_1088995[] 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal CD163-Unconjugated (10D6) Thermo Fisher Scientific MA5-11458; RRID: AB_10982556[] 
 
 Mouse Monoclonal EPCAM-eF660 (1B7) eBioscience 50-9326-42: RRID: AB_10598658[] 
 
 Rabbit Monoclonal CD68-Unconjugated (EPR20545) Abcam Ab213363; RRID: AB_2801637[] 
 
 Rabbit Monoclonal CD34-PE (EP373Y) Abcam Ab223930; 
 
 Anti- Mouse CD38 (REA616) FITC Miltenyi Biotec 130-122-955; RRID: AB_2811415[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CD26 (REA1196) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-122-775; RRID: AB_2801934[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse F4/80 (REA126) FITC Miltenyi Biotec 130-117-509; RRID: AB_2727970[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CD5 (53-7.3) FITC Miltenyi Biotec 130-102-574; RRID: AB_2658608[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CD79B (REA1117) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-119-425; RRID: AB_2751702[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CD45R/B220 (RA3-6B2) FITC Miltenyi Biotec 130-118-323; RRID: AB_2751482[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CD43 (L11) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-102-594; RRID: AB_2661309[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CCR2 (REA538) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-117-548; RRID: AB_2727981[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse MHCII (M5/114.15.2) FITC Miltenyi Biotec 130-123-666; RRID: AB_2802055[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CD73 (REA778) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-111-331; RRID: AB_2659153[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CD146 (REA1064) FITC Miltenyi Biotec 130-118-252; RRID: AB_2751472[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CD90.2 (30-H12) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-120-091; RRID: AB_2751997[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CD138 ( REA104) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-120-810; RRID: AB_2752204[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CD29 (REA1074) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-119-165; RRID: AB_2751649[] 
 
 Anti-Mouse CD105 (REA1058) FITC Miltenyi Biotec 130-118-173; RRID: AB_2733613[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD36 (REA760) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-110-877; RRID: AB_2657728[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD206 (REAL518) APC Miltenyi Biotec 130-122-168; RRID: AB_2857557[] 
 
 Anti-Human Collagen IV (REAL567) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-122-866; RRID: AB_2857566[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD105 (REA794) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-112-163; RRID: AB_2654424[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD146 (REA773) APC Miltenyi Biotec 130-111-323; RRID: AB_2655179[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD90 (REA897) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-114-860; RRID: AB_2726811[] 
 
 Anti-Human DESMIN (REA1134) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-119-490; RRID: AB_2857461[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD74 (REA1103) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-119-203; RRID: AB_2733836[] 
 
 Anti-Human EPCAM (REA764) FITC Miltenyi Biotec 130-110-998; RRID: AB_2657493[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD68 (REAL566) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-123-368; RRID: AB_2857592[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD1c (REA694) APC Miltenyi Biotec 130-110-537; RRID: AB_2656040[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD3 (REA1151) APC Miltenyi Biotec 130-120-269; RRID: AB_2876933[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD5 (REA782) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-110-990; RRID: AB_2658593[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD7 (REA1244) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-124-939; RRID: AB_2819716[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD19 (REAL106) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-122-649; RRID: AB_2784034[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD22 (REA340) APC Miltenyi Biotec 130-120-762; RRID: AB_2752186[] 
 
 Anti-Human S100A8 (REA917) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-115-253; RRID: AB_2726963[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD177 (REA258) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-101-525; RRID: AB_2655641[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD169 (REA1176) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-121-115; RRID: AB_2783985[] 
 
 Anti-Human CD163 (REA406) PE Miltenyi Biotec 130-121-316; RRID: AB_2857545[] 
 
 Antibodies: CITE-seq 
 
 TotalSeq-A0001 anti-mouse CD4 (RM4-5) BioLegend 100569; RRID: AB_2749956[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0002 anti-mouse CD8a (53-6.7) BioLegend 100773; RRID: AB_2734151[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0003 anti-mouse CD366 (Tim-3) (RMT3-23) BioLegend 119729; RRID: AB_2734178[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0004 anti-mouse CD279 (PD-1) (RMP1-30) BioLegend 109123; RRID: AB_2734169[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0005 anti-human CD80 (2D10) BioLegend 305239; RRID: AB_2749958[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0006 anti-human CD86 (IT2.2) BioLegend 305443; RRID: AB_2734273[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0007 anti-human CD274 (29E.2A3) BioLegend 329743; RRID: AB_2749959[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0008 anti-human CD273 (24F.10C112) BioLegend 329619; RRID: AB_2734321[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0009 anti-human CD275 (2D3) BioLegend 309413; RRID: AB_2734278[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0010 anti-human CD276 (DCN.70) BioLegend 331607; RRID: AB_2734327[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0012 anti-mouse CD117 (c-kit) (2B8) BioLegend 105843; RRID: AB_2749960[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0013 anti-mouse Ly-6C (HK1.4) BioLegend 128047; RRID: AB_2749961[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0014 anti-mouse/human CD11b (M1/70) BioLegend 101265; RRID: AB_2734152[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0015 anti-mouse Ly-6G (1A8) BioLegend 127655; RRID: AB_2749962[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0016 anti-human Galectin9 (9M1-3) BioLegend Barcode: ACTCACTGGAGTCTC 
 
 TotalSeq-A0020 anti-human CD270 (122) BioLegend 318813; RRID: AB_2734293[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0021 anti-human CD252 (11C3.1) BioLegend Barcode: TTTAGTGATCCGACT 
 
 TotalSeq-A0022 anti-human CD137L (5F4) BioLegend 311509; RRID: AB_2734284[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0023 anti-human CD155 (SKII.4) BioLegend 337623; RRID: AB_2749963[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0024 anti-human CD112 (TX31) BioLegend 337417; RRID: AB_2749964[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0026 anti-human CD47 (CC2C6) BioLegend 323129; RRID: AB_2734305[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0027 anti-human CD70 (113-16) BioLegend 355117; RRID: AB_2749965[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0028 anti-human CD30 (BY88) BioLegend 333913; RRID: AB_2749966[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0029 anti-human CD48 (BJ40) BioLegend 336709; RRID: AB_2734342[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0031 anti-human CD40 (5C3) BioLegend 334346; RRID: AB_2749968[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0032 anti-human CD154 (24-31) BioLegend 310843; RRID: AB_2734283[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0033 anti-human CD52 (HI186) BioLegend 316017; RRID: AB_2734292[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0034 anti-human CD3 (UCHT1) BioLegend 300475; RRID: AB_2734246[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0047 anti-human CD56 (5.1H11) BioLegend 362557; RRID: AB_2749970[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0050 anti-human CD19 (HIB19) BioLegend 302259; RRID: AB_2734256[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0052 anti-human CD33 (P67.6) BioLegend 366629; RRID: AB_2734409[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0053 anti-human CD11c (S-HCL-3) BioLegend 371519; RRID: AB_2749971[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0054 anti-human CD34 (581) BioLegend 343537; RRID: AB_2749972[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0056 anti-human CD269 (19F2) BioLegend 357521; RRID: AB_2749974[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0057 anti-human B2M (2M2) BioLegend 316321; RRID: AB_2749975[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0058 anti-human HLA-ABC (W6/32) BioLegend 311445; RRID: AB_2749976[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0060 anti-human CD90 (5E+10) BioLegend 328135; RRID: AB_2734312[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0061 anti-human CD117 (104D2) BioLegend 313241; RRID: AB_2734287[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0062 anti-human CD10 (HI10a) BioLegend 312231; RRID: AB_2832627[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0063 anti-human CD45RA (HI100) BioLegend 304157; RRID: AB_2734267[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0064 anti-human CD123 (6H6) BioLegend 306037; RRID: AB_2749977[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0066 anti-human CD7 (CD7-6B7) BioLegend 343123; RRID: AB_2734345[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0068 anti-human CD105 (43A3) BioLegend 323221; RRID: AB_2750350[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0069 anti-human CD201 (RCR-401) BioLegend 351907; RRID: AB_2749978[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0070 anti-human/mouse CD49f (GoH3) BioLegend 313633; RRID; AB_2734291 
 
 TotalSeq-A0073 anti-mouse/human CD44 (IM7) BioLegend 103045; RRID: AB_2734154[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0074 anti-mouse CD54 (YN1/1.7.4) BioLegend 116127; RRID: AB_2734177[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0074 anti-mouse CD90.2 (30-H12) Biolegend 105345; RRID: AB_2734166[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0076 anti-mouse/human CD15 (SSEA-1) (MC-480) BioLegend 125615; RRID: AB_2800603[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0077 anti-mouse CD73 (TY/11.8) BioLegend 127227; RRID: AB_2749980[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0078 anti-mouse CD49d (R1-2) BioLegend 103623; RRID: AB_2734159[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0079 anti-mouse CD200 (OX2) (OX-90) BioLegend 123811; RRID: AB_2734191[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0080 anti-human CD8a (RPA-T8) BioLegend 301067; RRID: AB_2734248[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0081 anti-human CD14 (M5E2) BioLegend 301855: RRID: AB_2734254[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0083 anti-human CD16 (3G8) BioLegend 302061; RRID: AB_2734255[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0085 anti-human CD25 (BC96) BioLegend 302643; RRID: AB_2734258[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0087 anti-human CD45RO (UCHL1) BioLegend 304255; RRID: AB_2734268[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0088 anti-human CD279 (EH12.2H7) BioLegend 329955; RRID: AB_2734322[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0089 anti-human TIGIT (A15153G) BioLegend 372725; RRID: AB_2734426[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0090 Mouse IgG1, k isotype Ctrl (MOPC-21) BioLegend 400199; RRID: AB_2868412[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0091 Mouse IgG2a, k isotype Ctrl (MOPC-173) BioLegend 400285; 
 
 TotalSeq-A0092 Mouse IgG2b, k isotype Ctrl (MPC-11) BioLegend 400373; 
 
 TotalSeq-A0093 anti-mouse CD19 (B4) BioLegend 115559; RRID: AB_2749981[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0094 anti-mouse CD3e (145-2C11) BioLegend Barcode: TAATGCCAGTTGTGC 
 
 TotalSeq-A0095 Rat IgG2b, k Isotype Ctrl (RTK4530) BioLegend 400673; 
 
 TotalSeq-A0097 anti-mouse CD25 (PC61) BioLegend 102055; RRID: AB_2749982[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0098 anti-mouse CD135 (A2F10) BioLegend 135316; RRID: AB_2749983[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0100 anti-human CD20 (2H7) BioLegend 302359; RRID: AB_2749984[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0101 anti-human CD335 (900) BioLegend 331943; RRID: AB_2800875[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0102 anti-human CD294 (BM16) BioLegend 350127; RRID: AB_2734360[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0103 anti-mouse/human CD45R/B220 BioLegend 103263; RRID: AB_2734158[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0104 anti-mouse CD102 (3C4 (MIC2/4)) BioLegend 105613; RRID: AB_2734167[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0105 anti-mouse CD115 (CSF-1R) (AFS98) BioLegend 135533; RRID: AB_2734198[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0106 anti-mouse CD11c (N418) BioLegend 117355; RRID: AB_2750352[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0107 anti-mouse CD21/CD35 (CR2/CR1) (7E9) BioLegend 123427; RRID: AB_2750540[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0108 anti-mouse CD23 (B3B4) BioLegend 101635; RRID: AB_2750358[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0109 anti-mouse CD16/32 (93) BioLegend 101343; RRID: AB_2750532[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0110 anti-mouse CD43 (S11) BioLegend 143211; RRID: AB_2750541[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0111 anti-mouse CD5 (53-7.3) BioLegend 100637; RRID: AB_2749985[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0112 anti-mouse CD62L (MEL-14) BioLegend 104451; RRID: AB_2750364[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0113 anti-mouse CD93 (AA4.1, early B lineage) (AA4.1) BioLegend 136513; RRID: AB_2750375[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0114 anti-mouse F4/80 (BM8) BioLegend 123153; RRID: AB_2749986[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0115 anti-mouse FceRIa (MAR-1) BioLegend 134333; RRID: AB_2749987[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0117 anti-mouse I-A/I-E (M5/114.15.2) BioLegend 107653; RRID: AB_2750505[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0118 anti-mouse NK-1.1 (PK136) BioLegend 108755; RRID: AB_2750536[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0119 anti-mouse Siglec H (551) BioLegend 129615; RRID: AB_2750537[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0120 anti-mouse TCRb (H57-597) Biolegend 109247; RRID: AB_2750538[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0121 anti-mouse TCRgd (GL3) Biolegend 118137; RRID: AB_2749988[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0122 anti-mouse Ter-119 (Ter-119) Biolegend 116247; RRID: AB_2749989[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0123 anti-human CD326 (9C4) BioLegend 324241; RRID: AB_2750362[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0124 anti-human CD31 (WM59) BioLegend 303137: RRID: AB_2750360[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0126 anti-human CD133 (clone 7) BioLegend 372815; RRID: AB_2750353[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0127 anti-human Podoplanin (NC-08) BioLegend 337019; RRID; AB_2749990 
 
 TotalSeq-A0128 anti-human CD140a (16A1) BioLegend 323509; RRID: AB_2750354[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0129 anti-human CD140b (18A2) BioLegend 323609; RRID: AB_2783192[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0130 anti-mouse Ly-6A/E (Sca-1) (D7) BioLegend 108147; RRID: AB_2750535[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0131 anti-human Cadherin (16G5) BioLegend 368715; RRID: AB_2749991[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0132 anti-human EGFR (AY13) BioLegend 352923; RRID: AB_2734373[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0134 anti-human CD146 (P1H12) BioLegend 361017: RRID: AB_2750355[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0136 anti-human IgM (MHM-88) BioLegend 314541; RRID: AB_2749992[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0138 anti-human CD5 (UCHT2) BioLegend 300635; RRID: AB_2750346[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0139 anti-human TCR (B1) BioLegend 331229; RRID: AB_2734325[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0140 anti-human CD183 (G025H7) BioLegend 353745; RRID: AB_2749993[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0141 anti-human CD195 (J418F1) BioLegend 359135; RRID: AB_2749994[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0142 anti-human CD32 (FUN-2) BioLegend 303223; RRID: AB_2749995[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0143 anti-human CD196 (G034E3) BioLegend 353437; RRID: AB_2750534[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0144 anti-human CD185 (J252D4) BioLegend 356937; RRID: AB_2750356[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0145 anti-human CD103 (Ber-ACT8) BioLegend 350231; RRID: AB_2749996[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0146 anti-human CD69 (FN50) BioLegend 310947; RRID: AB_2749997[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0147 anti-human CD62L (DREG-56) BioLegend 304847; RRID: AB_2750365[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0148 anti-human CD197 (G043H7) BioLegend 353247; RRID: AB_2750357[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0149 anti-human CD161 (HP-3G10) BioLegend 339945; RRID: AB_2749998[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0151 anti-human CD152 (BNI3) BioLegend 369619; RRID: AB_2734423[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0152 anti-human CD223 (11C3C65) BioLegend 369333; RRID: AB_2749999[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0153 anti-human KLRG1 (SA231A2) BioLegend 367721; RRID: AB_2750373[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0155 anti-human CD107a (H4A3) BioLegend 328647; RRID: AB_2750351[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0156 anti-human CD95 (DX2) BioLegend 305649; RRID: AB_2750368[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0158 anti-human CD134 (Ber-ACT35) BioLegend 350033; RRID: AB_2783245[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0159 anti-human HLA-DR (L243) BioLegend 307659; RRID: AB_2750001[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0160 anti-human CD1c (L161) BioLegend 331539; RRID: AB_2734326[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0162 anti-human CD64 (10.1) BioLegend 305037; RRID: AB_2750366[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0163 anti-human CD141 (M80) BioLegend 344121; RRID: AB_2783229[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0164 anti-human CD1d (51.1) BioLegend 350317; RRID: AB_2750370[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0165 anti-human CD314 (1D11) BioLegend 320835; RRID: AB_2734298[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0166 anti-human CD66b (6/40c) BioLegend 392905; RRID: AB_2750372[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0167 anti-human CD35 (E11) BioLegend 333407; RRID: AB_2783217[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0168 anti-human CD57 (QA17A04) BioLegend 393319; RRID: AB_2810588[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0169 anti-human CD366 (F38-2E2) BioLegend 345047; RRID: AB_2800924[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0170 anti-human CD272 (MIH26) BioLegend 344525; RRID: AB_2750002[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0171 anti-human/mouse/rat CD278 (ICOS) (C398.4A) BioLegend 313555; RRID: AB_2800824[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0173 anti-mouse CD206 (MMR) (C068C2) BioLegend Barcode: TCAACTCGGTGTTGC 
 
 TotalSeq-A0174 anti-human CD58 (TS2/9) BioLegend 330919; RRID: AB_2750003[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0175 anti-human CD96 (NK92.39) BioLegend 338419; RRID: AB_2750004[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0176 anti-human CD39 (A1) BioLegend 328233; RRID: AB_2750005[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0177 anti-human CD178 (NOK-1) BioLegend 306413; RRID: AB_2750500[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0180 anti-human CD24 (ML5) BioLegend 311137: RRID: AB_2750374[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0181 anti-human CD21 (Bu32) BioLegend 354915; RRID: AB_2750006[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0182 anti-mouse CD3 (17A2) Biolegend 100251; RRID: AB_2750533[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0184 anti-mouse CD335 (NKp46) (29A1.4) BioLegend 137633; RRID: AB_2734199[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0185 anti-human CD11a (TS2/4) BioLegend 350615; RRID: AB_2734365[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0186 anti-human IgA (HP6123) BioLegend Barcode: AAGATGTCCGAGCAA 
 
 TotalSeq-A0187 anti-human CD79b (CB3-1) BioLegend 341415; RRID: AB_2750347[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0188 anti-human CD66a_c_e (ASL-32) BioLegend 342319; RRID: AB_2783223[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0189 anti-human CD244 (C1.7) BioLegend 329527; RRID: AB_2750007[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0190 anti-mouse CD274 (B7-H1, PD-L1) (MIH6) BioLegend 153604; RRID: AB_2783125[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0191 anti-mouse/rat/human CD27 (LG.3A10 ) BioLegend 124235; RRID: AB_2750344[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0192 anti-mouse CD20 (SA275A11) BioLegend 150423; RRID: AB_2734214[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0193 anti-mouse CD357 (GITR) (DTA-1) BioLegend 126319; RRID: AB_2734195[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0194 anti-mouse CD137 (17B5) BioLegend 106111; RRID: AB_2783048[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0195 anti-mouse CD134 (OX-40) (OX-86) BioLegend 119426; RRID: AB_2750376[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0196 anti-human CD235ab (HIR2) BioLegend 306623; RRID: AB_2750008[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0197 anti-mouse CD69 (H1.2F3) BioLegend 104546; RRID: AB_2750539[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0198 anti-mouse CD127 (IL-7Ra) (A7R34) BioLegend 135045; RRID: AB_2750009[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0200 anti-mouse CD86 (GL-1) BioLegend 105047; RRID: AB_2750348[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0201 anti-mouse CD103 (2E7) BioLegend 121437; RRID: AB_2750349[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0202 anti-mouse CD64 (FcgRI) (X54-5/7.1) BioLegend 139325; RRID: AB_2750367[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0203 anti-mouse CD150 (SLAM) (TC15-12F12.2) BioLegend 115945; RRID: AB_2783055[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0204 anti-mouse CD28 (37.51) BioLegend Barcode: ATTAAGAGCGTGTTG 
 
 TotalSeq-A0205 anti-human CD206 (15-2) BioLegend 321143; RRID: AB_2750010[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0206 anti-human CD169 (7-239) BioLegend 346011; RRID: AB_2750011[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0207 anti-human CD370 (8F9) BioLegend 353807; RRID: AB_2814293[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0208 anti-human XCR1 (S15046E) BioLegend 372613; RRID: AB_2783286[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0209 anti-mouse TCR (2.11) BioLegend 141113; RRID: AB_2800654[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0210 anti-mouse TCR (536) BioLegend 137507; RRID: AB_2810404[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0211 anti-mouse TCR (UC3-10A6) BioLegend 137709; RRID: AB_2783100[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0212 anti-mouse CD24 (M1/69) BioLegend 101841; RRID: AB_2750380[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0213 anti-human Notch (MHN1-519) BioLegend 352109; RRID: AB_2783247[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0214 anti-human/mouse integrin b7 (FIB504) BioLegend 321227; RRID: AB_2750504[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0215 anti-human CD268 (11C1) BioLegend 316925; RRID: AB_2750502[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0216 anti-human CD42b (HIP1) BioLegend 303937; RRID: AB_2783163[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0217 anti-human CD54 (HA58) BioLegend 353123; RRID: AB_2750384[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0218 anti-human CD62P (AK4) BioLegend 304933; RRID: AB_2750386[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0219 anti-human CD119 (GIR-208) BioLegend 308607; RRID: AB_2750385[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0221 anti-human IRF5 (11F4A09) BioLegend Barcode: GGTAGCCCTAGAGTA 
 
 TotalSeq-A0224 anti-human TCR (IP26) BioLegend 306737: RRID: AB_2783167[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0225 anti-mouse CD196 (CCR6) (29-2L17) BioLegend 129825; RRID: AB_2783083[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0226 anti-mouse CD106 (429 (MVCAM.A)) BioLegend 105725; RRID: AB_2783044[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0227 anti-mouse CD122 (IL-2Rb) (5H4) BioLegend Barcode: GGTATGCGACACTTA 
 
 TotalSeq-A0228 anti-mouse CD183 (CXCR3) (CXCR3-173) BioLegend Barcode: GTTCACGCCGTAGACT 
 
 TotalSeq-A0229 anti-mouse CD62P (P-selectin) (RMP-1) BioLegend Barcode: TGTGTGCCGTAGACT 
 
 TotalSeq-A0230 anti-mouse CD8b (Ly-3) (YTS156.7.7) BioLegend 126623; RRID: AB_2800615[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0232 anti-mouse MAdCAM-1 (MECA-367) BioLegend 120713; RRID: AB_2783058[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0235 anti-mouse TCR (KJ16-133.18) BioLegend 118415; RRID: AB_2783056[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0236 Rat IgG1, k Isotype Ctrl (RTK2071) BioLegend 400459; 
 
 TotalSeq-A0237 Rat IgG1, l Isotype Ctrl (G0114F7) BioLegend 401919; 
 
 TotalSeq-A0238 Rat IgG2a, k Isotype Ctrl (RTK2758) BioLegend 400571; 
 
 TotalSeq-A0240 Purified Rat IgG2c, k Isotype Ctrl (RTK4174) BioLegend 400739; 
 
 TotalSeq-A0241 Armenian Hamster IgG Isotype Ctrl (HTK888) BioLegend 400973; 
 
 TotalSeq-A0242 anti-human CD192 (K036C2) BioLegend 357229; RRID: AB_2750501[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0244 anti-human CD102 (CBR-IC2/2) BioLegend 328509; RRID: AB_2750381[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0245 anti-human CD106 (STA) BioLegend 305813; RRID: AB_2800788[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0247 anti-human CD267 (1A1) BioLegend 311913; RRID: AB_2783181[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0248 anti-human CD62E (HAE-1f) BioLegend 336017; RRID: AB_2783218[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0249 anti-mouse/human IRF4 (IRF4.3E4) BioLegend Barcode: GGATTTGTATCTCCC 
 
 TotalSeq-A0250 anti-mouse/human KLRG1 (MAFA) (2F1/KLRG1) BioLegend 138431; RRID: AB_2800648[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0351 anti-human CD135 (BV10A4H2) BioLegend 313317; RRID: AB_2783188[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0352 anti-human FCeR1a (AER-37) BioLegend 334641; RRID: AB_2750503[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0353 anti-human CD41 (HIP8) BioLegend 303737; RRID: AB_2783162[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0354 anti-mouse TCR (MR9-4) BioLegend 139517; RRID: AB_2810408[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0355 anti-human CD137 (4B4-1) BioLegend 309835; RRID: AB_2783173[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0356 anti-human CD254 (MIH24) BioLegend 347509; RRID: AB_2750377[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0357 anti-human CD43 (CD43-10G7) BioLegend 343209; RRID: AB_2800915[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0358 anti-human CD163 (GHI/61) BioLegend 333635; RRID: AB_2750343[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0359 anti-human CD83 (HB15e) BioLegend 305339; RRID: AB_2800784[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0360 anti-human CD357 (108-17) BioLegend 371225; RRID: AB_2801016[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0361 anti-human CD59 (p282 (H19)) BioLegend 304709; RRID: AB_2750371[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0362 anti-human CD309 (7D4-6) BioLegend 359919; RRID: AB_2810571[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0364 anti-human CD13 (WM15) BioLegend 301729; RRID: AB_2783151[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0366 anti-human CD184 (12G5) BioLegend 306531; RRID: AB_2800790[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0367 anti-human CD2 (TS1/8) BioLegend Barcode: TACGATTTGTCAGGG 
 
 TotalSeq-A0368 anti-human CD226 (11A8) BioLegend 338335; RRID: AB_2783220[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0369 anti-human CD29 (TS2/16) BioLegend 303027; RRID: AB_2783160[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0370 anti-human CD303 (201A) BioLegend 354239; RRID: AB_2800952[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0371 anti-human CD49b (P1E6-C5) BioLegend 359311; RRID: AB_2750363[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0373 anti-human CD81 (5A6) BioLegend 349521; RRID: AB_2800930[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0374 anti-human CD98 (MEM-108) BioLegend 315605; RRID: AB_2750369[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0375 anti-human IgG (M1310G05) BioLegend 410725; RRID: AB_2783329[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0376 anti-mouse CD195 (CCR5) (HM-CCR5) BioLegend 107019; RRID: AB_2783049[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0377 anti-mouse CD197 (CCR7) (4B12) BioLegend Barcode: TTATTAACAGCCCAC 
 
 TotalSeq-A0378 anti-mouse CD223 (LAG-3) (C9B7W) BioLegend 125229; RRID: AB_2783078[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0379 anti-mouse CD62E (E-selectin) (RME-1/CD62E) BioLegend Barcode: CTCCCTTTGTAACAT 
 
 TotalSeq-A0381 anti-mouse Panendothelial Cell Antigen (MECA-32) BioLegend 120507; RRID: AB_2783057[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0382 anti-human CD177 (MEM-166) BioLegend 315811: RRID: AB_2750554[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0383 anti-human CD55 (JS11) BioLegend 311317; RRID: AB_2750378[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0384 anti-human IgD (IA6-2) BioLegend 348243; RRID: AB_2783238[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0385 anti-human CD18 (TS1/18) BioLegend 302121; RRID: AB_2750382[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0386 anti-human CD28 (CD28.2) BioLegend 302955; RRID: AB_2783159[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0387 anti-human TSLPR (1D3) BioLegend 322907; RRID: AB_2800845[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0388 anti-mouse CD152 (UC10-4B9) BioLegend 106325; RRID: AB_2876417[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0389 anti-human CD38 (HIT2) BioLegend 303541; RRID: AB_2783161[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0390 anti-human CD127 (A019D5) BioLegend 351352; RRID: AB_2734366[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0392 anti-human CD15 (W6D3) BioLegend 323046; RRID: AB_2734304[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0393 anti-human CD22 (S-HCL-1) BioLegend 363514; RRID: AB_2734404[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0394 anti-human CD71 (CY1G4) BioLegend 334123; RRID: AB_2800884[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0395 anti-human B7H4 (MIH43) BioLegend 358114; RRID: AB_2734386[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0396 anti-human CD26 (BA5b) BioLegend 302720; RRID: AB_2734261[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0397 anti-human CD193 (5e7) BioLegend 310729; RRID: AB_2783174[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0398 anti-human CD115 (9-4D2-1E4) BioLegend 347325; RRID: AB_2783237[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0399 anti-human CD204 (7C9C20) BioLegend 371909; RRID: AB_2810584[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0400 anti-human CD144 (BV9) BioLegend 348517; RRID: AB_2783239[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0401 anti-human CD301 (H037G3) BioLegend 354707; RRID: AB_2810566[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0402 anti-human CD1a (HI149) BioLegend 300133; RRID: AB_2783146[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0404 anti-human CD63 (H5C6) BioLegend 353035; RRID: AB_2783249[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0405 anti-human CD284 (HTA125) BioLegend 312817; RRID: AB_2783183[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0406 anti-human CD304 (12C2) BioLegend 354525; RRID: AB_2783261[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0407 anti-human CD36 (5-271) BioLegend 336225; RRID: AB_2800892[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0408 anti-human CD172a (15-414) BioLegend 372109; RRID: AB_2783285[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0409 anti-human CD85g (17G10.2 BioLegend 326411; RRID: AB_2750555[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0411 Polyclonal Clec4F (Custom) BioLegend Barcode: TATGCTGTGGCTATG 
 
 TotalSeq-A0414 Polyclonal VSIG4 (Custom) BioLegend Barcode: ACGTATATCACGTTG 
 
 TotalSeq-A0415 anti-P2RY12 (S16007D) BioLegend 848009; RRID: AB_2783419[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0416 anti-mouse CD300LG (Nepmucin) (ZAQ5) BioLegend 147105; RRID: AB_2783116[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0417 anti-mouse CD163 (S16007D) BioLegend 155303; RRID: AB_2814058[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0418 anti-human CD243 (4E3.16) BioLegend 919407: RRID: AB_2810817[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0419 anti-human CD72 (3F3) BioLegend 316205; RRID: AB_2783189[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0420 anti-human CD158 (HP-MA4) BioLegend 339515; RRID: AB_2800901[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0421 anti-mouse CD49b (HMa2) BioLegend 103523; RRID: AB_2819796[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0422 anti-mouse CD172a (SIRPa) (P84) BioLegend 144033; RRID: AB_2800670[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0423 anti-human MerTK (5900H11G1E3) BioLegend 367617; RRID: AB_2801011[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0424 anti-mouse CD14 (Sa14-2) BioLegend 123333; RRID: AB_2800591[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0426 anti-mouse CD192 (CCR2) (SA203G11) BioLegend 150625; RRID: AB_2783122[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0427 anti-human FOLR2 (94b/FOLR2) BioLegend 391707; RRID: AB_2783289[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0428 anti-human TIM4 (9F4) BioLegend 354009; RRID: AB_2783258[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0429 anti-mouse CD48 (HM48.1) BioLegend 103447; RRID: AB_2800558[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0430 anti-human CD171 (L1-OV198.5) BioLegend 371609; RRID: AB_2801019[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0432 anti-human CD320 (3F4) BioLegend 800319; RRID: AB_2801138[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0433 anti-human CD325 (8C11) BioLegend 350817; RRID: AB_2810555[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0434 anti-mouse/human ReceptorD4 BioLegend Barcode: TCTCTGCACCGCTTT 
 
 TotalSeq-A0435 anti-mouse/human GABRB3 BioLegend Barcode: GGTGTGAGCAGTTCT 
 
 TotalSeq-A0437 anti-mouse/human CD207 (4C7) BioLegend Barcode: CGATTTGTATTCCCT 
 
 TotalSeq-A0438 anti-mouse/rat KKC2 BioLegend Barcode: GAGCTTGTACCGCTT 
 
 TotalSeq-A0439 anti-mouse CD201 (RCR-16) BioLegend 141509; RRID: AB_2800655[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0440 anti-mouse CD169 (Siglec-1) (N1/12) BioLegend 142425; RRID: AB_2783106[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0441 anti-mouse CD71 (3D6.112) BioLegend 113824; RRID: AB_2800574[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0442 anti-mouse Notch (HMN1-12) BioLegend 130617; RRID: AB_2783085[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0443 anti-mouse CD41 (MWReg30) BioLegend 133937; RRID: AB_2800635[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0444 anti-mouse CXCR4 (L276F12) BioLegend 146520; RRID: AB_2800682[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0445 anti-human TMEM119 (A16075D) BioLegend 853303; RRID: AB_2801201[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0446 anti-human CD93 (VIMD2) BioLegend 336121; RRID: AB_2750379[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0448 anti-mouse CD204 (Msr1) (1F8C33) BioLegend 154703; RRID: AB_2783126[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0449 anti-mouse CD326 (Ep-CAM) (G8.8) BioLegend 118237; RRID: AB_2800586[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0450 anti-mouse IgM (RMM-1) BioLegend 406535; RRID: AB_2783322[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0551 anti-mouse CD301a (MGL1) (LOM-8.7) BioLegend 145611; RRID: AB_2783114[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0552 anti-mouse CD304 (Neuropilin-1) (3E12) BioLegend 145215; RRID: AB_2750383[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0554 anti-mouse CD309 (VEGFR2, Flk-1) (89B3A5) BioLegend 121921; RRID: AB_2783066[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0555 anti-mouse CD36 (HM36) BioLegend 102621; RRID: AB_2800557[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0556 anti-mouse CD370 (CLEC9A-DNGR1) (7H11) BioLegend Barcode: AACTCAGTTGTGCCG 
 
 TotalSeq-A0557 anti-mouse CD38 (90) BioLegend 102733; RRID: AB_2750556[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0558 anti-mouse CD55 (DAF) ( RIKO-3) BioLegend 131809; RRID: AB_2783086[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0559 anti-mouse CD63 (NVG-2) BioLegend 143915; RRID: AB_2783109[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0560 anti-mouse CD68 (FA-11) BioLegend 137031; RRID: AB_2783099[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0561 anti-mouse CD79b (Igb) (HM79-12) BioLegend 132811; RRID: AB_2783087[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0562 anti-mouse CD83 (Michel-19) BioLegend 121519; RRID: AB_2783061[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0563 anti-mouse CX3CR1 (SA011F11) BioLegend 149041; RRID: AB_2783121[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0564 anti-mouse Folate Receptor b (FR-b) (10/FR2) BioLegend 153307; RRID: AB_2800690[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0565 anti-mouse MERTK (Mer) (2B10C42) BioLegend Barcode: AGTAGAGCAACTCGT 
 
 TotalSeq-A0566 anti-mouse CD301b (MGL2) (URA-1) BioLegend 146817; RRID: AB_2783115[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0567 anti-mouse Tim-4 (RMT4-54) BioLegend 130011; RRID: AB_2783084[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0568 anti-mouse/rat XCR1 (ZET) BioLegend 148227; RRID: AB_2783120[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0569 anti-human CD338 (5D3) BioLegend 332021; RRID: AB_2783216[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0570 anti-mouse/rat CD29 (HMb1-1) BioLegend 102233; RRID: AB_2783042[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0571 anti-mouse IgD (11-26c.2a) BioLegend 405745; RRID: AB_2783321[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0572 anti-human C5L2 (1D(-M12) BioLegend 342407; RRID: 2783226 
 
 TotalSeq-A0573 anti-mouse CD140a (APA5) BioLegend 135917; RRID: AB_2783094[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0574 anti-human CD235a (HI264) BioLegend 349117; RRID: AB_2783242[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0575 anti-human CD49a (TS2/7) BioLegend 328315; RRID: AB_2783195[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0576 anti-human CD49d (9F10) BioLegend 304337; RRID: AB_2783166[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0577 anti-human CD73 (AD2) BioLegend 344029; RRID: AB_2783228[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0578 anti-human CD79a BioLegend Barcode: CTTATCACCCGCTTT 
 
 TotalSeq-A0579 anti-human CD9 (H19a) BioLegend 312119; RRID: AB_2783182[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0580 anti-human mast cell tryptase BioLegend Barcode: ACTGATAGACCCGCT 
 
 TotalSeq-A0581 anti-human TCR (3C10) BioLegend 351733; RRID: AB_2783246[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0582 anti-human TCR (B6) BioLegend 331433; RRID: AB_2800863[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0583 anti-human TCR (B3) BioLegend 331311; RRID: AB_2783207[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0584 anti-human TCR (6B11) BioLegend 342923; RRID: AB_2783227[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0586 anti-human CD354 (Trem-26) BioLegend 314910; 
 
 TotalSeq-A0588 anti-human CD202b (HIT2) BioLegend 334213; RRID: AB_2810511[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0590 anti-human CD305 (NKTA255) BioLegend 342805; RRID: AB_2800911[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0591 anti-human LOX1 (15C4) BioLegend 358611; RRID: AB_2800987[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0592 anti-human CD158b (DX27) BioLegend 312615; RRID: AB_2800818[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0593 anti-human CD203c (NP4D6) BioLegend 324627; RRID: AB_2800849[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0595 anti-mouse CD11a (M17/4) BioLegend 101125; RRID: AB_2783036[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0596 anti-mouse ESAM (1G8/ESAM) BioLegend 136209; RRID: AB_2800642[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0597 anti-human CD209 (9E9A8) BioLegend 330119; RRID: AB_2783206[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0599 anti-human CD158e1 (DX9) BioLegend 312723; RRID: AB_2800819[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0600 anti-human CD158f (UP-R1) BioLegend 341307; RRID: AB_2800904[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0801 anti-human CD337 (P30-15) BioLegend 325221; RRID: AB_2800852[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0803 anti-human CD253 (RIK-2) BioLegend 308211; RRID: AB_2800803[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0804 anti-human CD186 (K041E5) BioLegend 356021; RRID: AB_2800961[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0807 anti-mouse CD200R (OX-110) BioLegend 123913; RRID: AB_2800594[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0808 anti-mouse CD193 (J073E5) BioLegend 144523; RRID: AB_2800673[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0809 anti-mouse CD200R3 (Ba13) BioLegend 142209; RRID: AB_2800657[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0810 anti-mouse CD138 (281-2) BioLegend 142532; RRID: AB_2800658[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0811 anti-mouse CD317 (27) BioLegend 127027; RRID: AB_2800623[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0812 anti-mouse CD105 (MJ7/18) BioLegend 120421; RRID: AB_2800587[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0813 anti-mouse CD9 (MZ3) BioLegend 124819; RRID: AB_2800600[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0814 anti-human CD205 (HD30) BioLegend 342211; RRID: AB_2800908[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0816 anti-human CD271 (ME20.4) BioLegend 345123; RRID: AB_2814273[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0817 anti-human CD109 (W7C5) BioLegend 323307; RRID: AB_2800848[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0819 anti-human CD126 (UV4) BioLegend 352813; RRID: AB_2800939[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0821 anti-human CD164 (67D2) BioLegend 324809; RRID: AB_2800850[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0822 anti-human CD142 (NY2) BioLegend 365207; RRID: AB_2801007[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0824 anti-mouse P2X7R (1F11) BioLegend 148711; RRID: AB_2800683[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0825 anti-mouse CD371 (5D3/Clec12a) BioLegend 143407; RRID: AB_2800668[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0826 anti-human CD307c (H5/FcRL3) BioLegend 374411; RRID: AB_2801022[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0827 anti-mouse CD22 (OX-97) BioLegend 126113; RRID: AB_2800614[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0828 anti-human CD307d (413D12) BioLegend 340209; RRID: AB_2800902[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0829 anti-human CD307e (509f6) BioLegend 340307; RRID: AB_2800903[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0830 anti-human CD319 (162.1) BioLegend 331821; RRID: AB_2800872[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0831 anti-human CD138 (DL-101) BioLegend 352325; RRID: AB_2800938[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0834 anti-mouse CD39 (Duha59) BioLegend 143813; RRID: AB_2800669[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0835 anti-mouse CD314 (NKG2D) (CX5) BioLegend 130215; RRID: AB_2814023[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0836 anti-mouse DR3 (4C12) BioLegend 144413; RRID: AB_2814048[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0837 anti-mouse IL33RA (DIH9) BioLegend 145317; RRID: AB_2800680[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0839 anti-mouse Ly49H (3D10) BioLegend 144715; RRID: AB_2814049[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0841 anti-mouse Ly49D (4E5) BioLegend 138309; RRID: AB_2800647[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0843 anti-human CD199 (L053E8) BioLegend 358919; RRID: AB_2810569[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0844 anti-human CD45RB (MEM-55) BioLegend 310209; RRID: AB_2810471[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0845 anti-human CD99 (3B2/TA8) BioLegend 371317: RRID: AB_2801017[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0846 anti-mouse CD185 (L138D7) BioLegend 145535; RRID: AB_2800681[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0848 anti-mouse TIGIT (1G9) BioLegend 142115; RRID: AB_2800656[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0849 anti-mouse CD80 (16-10A1) BioLegend 104745; RRID: AB_2813935[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0850 anti-mouse CD49a (Hma1) BioLegend 142613; RRID: AB_2800659[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0851 anti-mouse CD1d (1B1) BioLegend 123529; RRID: AB_2800593[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0852 anti-mouse CD226 (10E5) BioLegend 128823; RRID: AB_2810393[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0853 anti-human CD371 (50C1) BioLegend 353613; RRID: AB_2800948[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0857 anti-mouse CD34 (HM34) BioLegend 128619; RRID: AB_2810392[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0858 anti-human CD46 (TRA-2-10) BioLegend 352415; RRID: AB_2810557[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0861 anti-human CD151 (50-6) BioLegend 350409; RRID: AB_2810554[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0862 anti-human CD218a (H44) BioLegend 313815; RRID: AB_2810476[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0863 anti-human CD257 (1D6) BioLegend 366509; RRID: AB_2810575[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0866 anti-human CLEC1B (AYP1) BioLegend 372009; RRID: AB_2814333[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0867 anti-human CD94 (DX22) BioLegend 305521; RRID: AB_2814142[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0868 anti-human IgE (MHE-18) BioLegend 325517; RRID: AB_2814186[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0869 anti-human CD365 (1D12) BioLegend 353907; RRID: AB_2814294[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0870 anti-human CD150 (A12) BioLegend 306313; RRID: AB_2814146[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0871 anti-human CD162 (KPL-1) BioLegend 328821; RRID: AB_2814192[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0875 anti-mouse TLR4 (MTS510) BioLegend 117614; RRID: AB_2810352[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0876 anti-mouse CD300c_d (TX52) BioLegend 148005; RRID: AB_2810413[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0877 anti-mouse JAML (4E+10) BioLegend 128507; RRID: AB_2810391[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0881 anti-mouse CD272 (6A6) BioLegend 139113; RRID: AB_2814041[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0882 anti-mouse PIRA_PIRB (6C1) BioLegend 144105; RRID: AB_2810412[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0883 anti-mouse CD26 (H194-112) BioLegend 137811; RRID: AB_2810405[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0884 anti-mouse DLL1 (HMD1-3) BioLegend 128315; RRID: AB_2810390[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0885 anti-mouse CD270 (HMHC-1B18) BioLegend 136307; RRID: AB_2810403[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0890 anti-mouse 4_1BB (TKS-1) BioLegend 107109: RRID: AB_2813955[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0891 anti-mouse ENPP (YE1/19.1) BioLegend 149209; RRID: AB_2814052[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0892 anti-mouse CD2 (RM2-5) BioLegend 100117; RRID: AB_2810312[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0894 anti-human Ig (MHL-38) BioLegend 316531; RRID: AB_2810479[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0895 anti-mouse/human Mac2 (LM3/38) BioLegend 125421; RRID: AB_281384[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0896 anti-human CD85j (GHI/75) BioLegend 333723; RRID: AB_2814225[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0897 anti-human CD23 (EBVCS-5) BioLegend 338523; RRID: AB_2814235[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0898 anti-human Ig (MHK-49) BioLegend 316627; RRID: AB_2814170[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0899 anti-human HLA-A2 (BB7.2) BioLegend 343331; RRID: AB_2810540[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0900 anti-human CD198 (L263G8) BioLegend 360607; RRID: AB_2810572[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0901 anti-human GARP (7B11) BioLegend 352515; RRID: AB_2814283[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0904 anti-mouse CD31 (390) BioLegend 102437; RRID: AB_2810335[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0905 anti-mouse CD107a (1D4B) BioLegend 121635; RRID: AB_2810369[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0916 anti-mouse CD124 (I015F8) BioLegend 144809; RRID: AB_2814050[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0917 anti-mouse CD95 (SA367H8) BioLegend 152614; RRID: AB_2810418[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A0923 anti-human NKp80 (5D12) BioLegend 346709; RRID: AB_2814274[] 
 
 TotalSeq-A5106 anti-mouse Ly6D BioLegend Barcode: ATGTCCTACCTCAAA 
 
 Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins 
 
 Antigenfix Diapath P0014 
 
 b-mercaptoethanol Sigma-Aldrich M3148 
 
 Calcium chloride dihydrate Merck 1023821000 
 
 Collagenase A Sigma-Aldrich 11088793001 
 
 D-(-)-Fructose Merck-Millipore 1040071000 
 
 D(+)-Saccharose VWR International PROL27483.294 
 
 DAPI Invitrogen D1306; RIDD: AB_2629482 
 
 DMEM Invitrogen 41965-039 
 
 Dnase I Sigma-Aldrich 04 536 282 001 
 
 Donkey Serum Abcam ab7475 
 
 EDTA Westburg 51234 
 
 EGTA Sigma-Aldrich E3889 
 
 Eosin VWR International MERC 1.15935 
 
 FcBlock 2.4G2 Bioceros N/A 
 
 FCS Bodinco 5010 
 
 Fixable Viability due Live/Dead - eFluor506 eBioscience 65-0866-18 
 
 Fixable Viability due Live/Dead - eFluor780 eBioscience 65-0865-18 
 
 Fixation/Permeabilization Solution Kit BD Cytofix/Cytoperm 554714 
 
 FoxP3 Transcription factor staining buffer kit eBioscience 00-5523-00 
 
 Gentamicin Gibco 15710-049 
 
 GlutaMAX Thermo Fisher 35050-038 
 
 Gluteraldehyde 25% Sigma-Aldrich G5882 
 
 Goat Serum Sigma-Aldrich G9023 
 
 Hematoxylin VWR International MERC1.05174 
 
 HEPES Sigma-Aldrich H3375 
 
 Isopropanol Vel T0108 
 
 Methanol Merck Millipore 13680502 
 
 Paraformaldehyde 10% EMS 15712 
 
 Phenol Red Sigma-Aldrich P3532 
 
 ProLong Diamond Thermo Fisher P36970 
 
 Rat Serum Sigma-Aldrich R9759 
 
 Ribonucleoside Vanadyl Complexes Sigma-Aldrich R3380-5ML 
 
 Roche Protector RNAse inhibitor Sigma-Aldrich 3335399001 
 
 RPMI 1640 Gibco 52400-025 
 
 Saponin Sigma-Aldrich 4521 
 
 10X SDS Sigma-Aldrich 71736-100ML 
 
 Sodium bicarbonate Sigma-Aldrich 792519 
 
 Sodium chloride Sigma-Aldrich 746398 
 
 Sodium Dihydrogen Phosphate Monohydrate Sigma-Aldrich 1063461000 
 
 Sodium phosphate dibasic dihydrate Sigma-Aldrich 71643 
 
 Tissue-Tek O.C.T Sakura Finetek 4583 
 
 UltraPure(tm) Salmon Sperm DNA Solution Thermo Fisher Scientific 15632011 
 
 Xylene Prolabo PROL28973.363 
 
 Critical commercial assays 
 
 ALLin HS Red Taq Mastermix 2x highQu HQ.HSM0350 
 
 RNEasy Plus Micro Kit QIAGEN 74034 
 
 SensiFAST cDNA Synthesis Kit Bioline BIO-65054 
 
 SensiFAST SYBR No-ROX Kit Bioline BIO-98020 
 
 Visium Spatial Gene Expression Slide and Reagent Kit 10X Genomics 1000184 
 
 Oligonucleotides: qPCR 
 
 Flt3 - qPCR FWD IDT GTGACTGGCCCCCTGGATAACGAG 
 
 Flt3 - qPCR REV IDT TCCAAGGGCGGGTGTAACTGAACT 
 
 Xcr1 - qPCR FWD IDT AGAGACACCGAACAGTCAGGCT 
 
 Xcr1 - qPCR REV IDT TGTCCAGTTGCTGAAGGCTCTC 
 
 Cd209a - qPCR FWD IDT GCACTCCATCAAAGGCTTTGGC 
 
 Cd209a - qPCR REV IDT CAAACAGCTAGGAAGAGCACCTG 
 
 Ccr7 - qPCR FWD IDT AGAGGCTCAAGACCATGACGGA 
 
 Ccr7 - qPCR REV IDT TCCAGGACTTGGCTTCGCTGTA 
 
 Mafb - qPCR FWD IDT TGAATTTGCTGGCACTGCTG 
 
 Mafb - qPCR REV IDT AAGCACCATGCGGTTCATACA 
 
 Cd5l - qPCR FWD IDT GAGGACACATGGATGGAATGT 
 
 Cd5l - qPCR REV IDT ACCCTTGTGTAGCACCTCCA 
 
 Cd207 - qPCR FWD IDT CCGAAGCGCACTTCACAGT 
 
 Cd207 - qPCR REV IDT GCAGATACAGAGAGGTTTCCTCA 
 
 Spp1 - qPCR FWD IDT CCATCTCAGAAGCAGAATCTCCTT 
 
 Spp1 - qPCR REV IDT GGTCATGGCTTTCATTGGAATT 
 
 Gata6 - qPCR FWD IDT CAGCAGGACCCTTCGAAAC 
 
 Gata6 - qPCR REV IDT CCATTCATCTTGCTGTAGAGACC 
 
 Gpnmb - qPCR FWD IDT AGCACAACCAATTACGTGGC 
 
 Gpnmb - qPCR REV IDT CTTCCCAGGAGTCCTTCCA 
 
 Pla2g7 - qPCR FWD IDT CTTCAAGCCCTTAGTGAGGACC 
 
 Pla2g7 - qPCR REV IDT TGCGATGTCCTTTGGAGTCTGG 
 
 Cd9 - qPCR FWD IDT GCTACTCGAGCCATGCCGGTCA 
 AAGGAGGTAGC 
 
 Cd9 - qPCR REV IDT CACTTGGTACCGACCATTTCTC 
 GGCTCCTGCG 
 
 Cd36 - qPCR FWD IDT GGAGCCATCTTTGAGCCTTCA 
 
 Cd36 - qPCR REV IDT GAACCAAACTGAGGAATGGATCT 
 
 Il1b - qPCR FWD IDT GCAACTGTTCCTGAACTCAACT 
 
 Il1b - qPCR REV IDT ATCTTTTGGGGTCCGTCAACT 
 
 Tnf - qPCR FWD IDT TCTTCTCATTCCTGCTTGTGG 
 
 Tnf - qPCR REV IDT GGTCTGGGCCATAGAACTGA 
 
 Il10 - qPCR FWD IDT AAGGCAGTGGAGCAGGTGAA 
 
 Il10 - qPCR REV IDT CCAGCAGACTCAATACACAC 
 
 Il18 - qPCR FWD IDT ACTGTACAACCGCAGTAATACGC 
 
 Il18 - qPCR REV IDT AGTGAACATTACAGATTTATCCC 
 
 Actb - qPCR FWD IDT GCTTCTAGGCGGACTGTTACTGA 
 
 Actb - qPCR REV IDT GCCATGCCAATGTTGTCTCTTAT 
 
 Oligonucleotides: Molecular cartography probes 
 
 FLT3 Resolve Bio. P0C6W 
 
 PDGFRB Resolve Bio. P0D6V 
 
 LGR5 Resolve Bio. P0E6T 
 
 OTOA Resolve Bio. P0N7M 
 
 CLEC10A Resolve Bio. P1C6X 
 
 COLEC11 Resolve Bio. P1D6W 
 
 GLS2 Resolve Bio. P1E6V 
 
 KRT19 Resolve Bio. P1N6M 
 
 SDS Resolve Bio. P1N7N 
 
 SIRPA Resolve Bio. P2C6Y 
 
 NGFR Resolve Bio. P2D6X 
 
 HAL Resolve Bio. P2E6W 
 
 GNLY Resolve Bio. P2K1J 
 
 SLC16A9 Resolve Bio. P2N7P 
 
 CD1E Resolve Bio. P3C6Z 
 
 HGF Resolve Bio. P3D6Y 
 
 SLC38A1 Resolve Bio. P3N7Q 
 
 ITGAX Resolve Bio. P4422 
 
 CD4 Resolve Bio. P4A2X 
 
 ADAMTSL2 Resolve Bio. P4D6Z 
 
 SLC40A1 Resolve Bio. P4N7R 
 
 CDKN1C Resolve Bio. P5A1X 
 
 CPA3 Resolve Bio. P5C60 
 
 MFAP4 Resolve Bio. P5D6L 
 
 CXCR6 Resolve Bio. P6C61 
 
 COL1A1 Resolve Bio. P6D60 
 
 CD3E Resolve Bio. P6J1Q 
 
 TIMD4 Resolve Bio. P6N7T 
 
 NCR1 Resolve Bio. P7A2L 
 
 CXCL12 Resolve Bio. P7C62 
 
 MARCO Resolve Bio. P8C63 
 
 MYH11 Resolve Bio. P8D62 
 
 CD5L Resolve Bio. P9C64 
 
 ACTA2 Resolve Bio. P9D63 
 
 IGFBP3 Resolve Bio. PAA11 
 
 VSIG4 Resolve Bio. PAC65 
 
 F8 Resolve Bio. PAD64 
 
 NKG7 Resolve Bio. PC13E 
 
 GPNMB Resolve Bio. PCC66 
 
 CMTM2 Resolve Bio. PDC67 
 
 FLT4 Resolve Bio. PDD66 
 
 CTSG Resolve Bio. PDN7L 
 
 CSF1R Resolve Bio. PDR2R 
 
 CD79A Resolve Bio. PE13G 
 
 EPCAM Resolve Bio. PEW3P 
 
 FCGR3B Resolve Bio. PFC69 
 
 FCGR3A Resolve Bio. PFT1Q 
 
 FOLR2 Resolve Bio. PFW6T 
 
 LILRA4 Resolve Bio. PGC6A 
 
 FCGBP Resolve Bio. PGN61 
 
 PLA2G7 Resolve Bio. PGN72 
 
 DPT Resolve Bio. PGX6T 
 
 CLEC4C Resolve Bio. PHC6C 
 
 WNT2 Resolve Bio. PHD6A 
 
 SPN Resolve Bio. PHM1Z 
 
 LHX6 Resolve Bio. PJD6C 
 
 CD8A Resolve Bio. PJJ11 
 
 AXL Resolve Bio. PJR2X 
 
 VWF Resolve Bio. PKD6D 
 
 DCN Resolve Bio. PKY4T 
 
 FCN1 Resolve Bio. PMC6F 
 
 RSPO3 Resolve Bio. PMD6E 
 
 CCR7 Resolve Bio. PMH14 
 
 HTRA3 Resolve Bio. PMJ68 
 
 CCL21 Resolve Bio. PMM77 
 
 CLEC12A Resolve Bio. PNC6G 
 
 GJA5 Resolve Bio. PND6F 
 
 STAB2 Resolve Bio. PNJ69 
 
 CD36 Resolve Bio. PNM78 
 
 CD68 Resolve Bio. PPC6H 
 
 LYVE1 Resolve Bio. PPJ6A 
 
 IL7R Resolve Bio. PPK14 
 
 CD9 Resolve Bio. PPM79 
 
 MSLN Resolve Bio. PQJ6C 
 
 ENHO Resolve Bio. PQM7A 
 
 TREM2 Resolve Bio. PR32Q 
 
 SOX9 Resolve Bio. PRD6J 
 
 RELN Resolve Bio. PRM15 
 
 F13A1 Resolve Bio. PRM7C 
 
 SPP1 Resolve Bio. PSD6K 
 
 FCER1A Resolve Bio. PSM7D 
 
 MAFB Resolve Bio. PTA6P 
 
 CD19 Resolve Bio. PTH1A 
 
 FCGR1A Resolve Bio. PTM7E 
 
 C5AR1 Resolve Bio. PVA6Q 
 
 GDF15 Resolve Bio. PVM7F 
 
 CD1C Resolve Bio. PWA6R 
 
 FCGR2B Resolve Bio. PWC2K 
 
 WT1 Resolve Bio. PWD6P 
 
 GLUL Resolve Bio. PWG1E 
 
 IGSF21 Resolve Bio. PWM7G 
 
 XCR1 Resolve Bio. PXA6S 
 
 CYP2E1 Resolve Bio. PXD6Q 
 
 CD14 Resolve Bio. PXS37 
 
 CLEC9A Resolve Bio. PYA6T 
 
 LILRB5 Resolve Bio. PYM7J 
 
 THBD Resolve Bio. PZA6V 
 
 DES Resolve Bio. PZC6T 
 
 GHR Resolve Bio. PZD6S 
 
 NDST3 Resolve Bio. PZM7K 
 
 Trem2 Resolve Bio. P0E2P 
 
 Wt1 Resolve Bio. P0E4R 
 
 Adgrg6 Resolve Bio. P0F4Q 
 
 Lilra5 Resolve Bio. P0M7N 
 
 Itgax Resolve Bio. P1C1R 
 
 Dcn Resolve Bio. P1E4S 
 
 Mmrn1 Resolve Bio. P1F4R 
 
 Lpl Resolve Bio. P1M7P 
 
 Cd79a Resolve Bio. P2662 
 
 Cd36 Resolve Bio. P2A5Y 
 
 Gpnmb Resolve Bio. P2H7T 
 
 Marco Resolve Bio. P2M7Q 
 
 Cd19 Resolve Bio. P3663 
 
 Pdgfrb Resolve Bio. P3E4V 
 
 Adgre1 Resolve Bio. P3F4T 
 
 Adamtsl2 Resolve Bio. P3K7S 
 
 Mfap4 Resolve Bio. P3M7R 
 
 Lyve1 Resolve Bio. P4961 
 
 Axl Resolve Bio. P4C1V 
 
 Olfml3 Resolve Bio. P4E2T 
 
 Atp6v0d2 Resolve Bio. P4K7T 
 
 Mmp12 Resolve Bio. P4M7S 
 
 C5ar1 Resolve Bio. P5K7V 
 
 Msln Resolve Bio. P5M7T 
 
 Lhx6 Resolve Bio. P5T2F 
 
 Fn1 Resolve Bio. P6952 
 
 Ccr7 Resolve Bio. P6K7W 
 
 Cd14 Resolve Bio. P7K7X 
 
 Nrxn1 Resolve Bio. P7M7W 
 
 Acta2 Resolve Bio. P8668 
 
 Cd207 Resolve Bio. P8K7Y 
 
 Cd5l Resolve Bio. P9K7Z 
 
 Rspo3 Resolve Bio. P9M7Y 
 
 Ccr2 Resolve Bio. PAF40 
 
 Slc40a1 Resolve Bio. PAM7Z 
 
 Gls2 Resolve Bio. PAN7Y 
 
 Sds Resolve Bio. PCG40 
 
 Clec10a Resolve Bio. PCK70 
 
 Spon2 Resolve Bio. PCM7L 
 
 Pck1 Resolve Bio. PCN7Z 
 
 Sirpa Resolve Bio. PDH73 
 
 Clec4f Resolve Bio. PDK71 
 
 Stab2 Resolve Bio. PDM70 
 
 Krt19 Resolve Bio. PE07N 
 
 Siglech Resolve Bio. PEF43 
 
 Clic5 Resolve Bio. PEK72 
 
 Svep1 Resolve Bio. PEM71 
 
 Cd9 Resolve Bio. PFH75 
 
 Col1a1 Resolve Bio. PFK73 
 
 Timd4 Resolve Bio. PFM72 
 
 Pecam1 Resolve Bio. PFP5Z 
 
 Cx3cr1 Resolve Bio. PG35J 
 
 Ncam1 Resolve Bio. PGE46 
 
 Colec11 Resolve Bio. PGK74 
 
 Tmem119 Resolve Bio. PGM73 
 
 Pdgfra Resolve Bio. PHG45 
 
 Cox6a2 Resolve Bio. PHK75 
 
 Upk3b Resolve Bio. PHM74 
 
 Cxcl12 Resolve Bio. PJK76 
 
 Wnt2 Resolve Bio. PJM75 
 
 Reln Resolve Bio. PK54J 
 
 Fcgr1 Resolve Bio. PK86H 
 
 Myh11 Resolve Bio. PK95F 
 
 Des Resolve Bio. PKK77 
 
 Wnt9b Resolve Bio. PKM76 
 
 Sox9 Resolve Bio. PKT6L 
 
 Chil3 Resolve Bio. PMH7A 
 
 Dpt Resolve Bio. PMK78 
 
 Grip1 Resolve Bio. PND2A 
 
 Ms4a7 Resolve Bio. PNH7C 
 
 F13a1 Resolve Bio. PNK79 
 
 Vsig4 Resolve Bio. PPH7D 
 
 Flt3 Resolve Bio. PPK7A 
 
 Spp1 Resolve Bio. PQD4F 
 
 Flt4 Resolve Bio. PQK7C 
 
 Epcam Resolve Bio. PRD4G 
 
 Plpp1 Resolve Bio. PRE4F 
 
 Folr2 Resolve Bio. PRK7D 
 
 Cd3e Resolve Bio. PS56T 
 
 Clec9a Resolve Bio. PS66S 
 
 Ghr Resolve Bio. PSF4F 
 
 Mafb Resolve Bio. PSS66 
 
 Gja5 Resolve Bio. PTK7F 
 
 Cyp2e1 Resolve Bio. PVF4H 
 
 Sept3 Resolve Bio. PW66W 
 
 Vwf Resolve Bio. PWE4K 
 
 Lgr5 Resolve Bio. PWF4J 
 
 Hal Resolve Bio. PWK7H 
 
 Prox1 Resolve Bio. PWS25 
 
 Xcr1 Resolve Bio. PX86V 
 
 Hgf Resolve Bio. PXK7J 
 
 Itgae Resolve Bio. PY86W 
 
 Spn Resolve Bio. PYE7R 
 
 Igfbp3 Resolve Bio. PYK7K 
 
 Cd209a Resolve Bio. PYM6H 
 
 Glul Resolve Bio. PZ81R 
 
 Itgb7 Resolve Bio. PZK7M 
 
 Mgl2 Resolve Bio. PZM6J 
 
 Software and algorithms 
 
 Adobe Illustrator Adobe www.adobe.com[] 
 
 Cell Ranger 10X Genomics https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/pipelines/latest/what-is-cell-ranger[] 
 
 FastCAR R Package N/A https://github.com/LungCellAtlas/FastCAR[] 
 
 Seurat R Package V3 (Stuart et al., 2019) https://satijalab.org/seurat/[] 
 
 Scater R Package (McCarthy et al., 2017) https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/scater.html[] 
 
 BioMart N/A https://www.ensembl.org/biomart/martview/3e2c65a5e3f783f8c9e5d648e4b64126[] 
 
 pheatmap R package N/A https://rdrr.io/cran/pheatmap/[] 
 
 ggplot2 (Wickham 2016) https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org[] 
 
 Scanpy (Wolf et al., 2018) https://scanpy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/[] 
 
 PyTorch N/A https://pytorch.org[] 
 
 TotalVI (Gayoso et al., 2021) https://docs.scvi-tools.org/en/stable/user_guide/models/totalvi.html[] 
 
 ScVI (Lopez et al., 2018) https://docs.scvi-tools.org/en/stable/user_guide/models/totalvi.html[] 
 
 NicheNet (Browaeys et al. 2019) https://github.com/saeyslab/nichenetr[] 
 
 Enrichr (Kuleshov et al., 2016) http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/[] 
 
 FlowJo v10.6.1 FlowJo https://www.flowjo.com[] 
 
 GeneOntology (Ashburner et al., 2000) http://geneontology.org/[] 
 
 GraphPad Prism 9 GraphPad https://www.graphpad.com/[] 
 
 Harmony (Korsunsky et al., 2019) https://www.github.com/immunogenomics/harmony[] 
 
 Ilastik (Berg et al., 2019) https://www.ilastik.org/[] 
 
 ImageJ (Schneider et al., 2012) https://imagej.nih.gov/ij[] 
 
 Qi-Tissue Quantitative Imagining Systems https://www.qi-tissue.com[] 
 
 genexyz Polylux Resolve Biosciences 
 
 Single-Cell Signature Explorer algorithm (Pont et al., 2019) https://sites.google.com/site/fredsoftwares/products/single-cell-signature-explorer[] 
 
 WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit (Liao et al., 2019) http://www.webgestalt.org/[] 
 
 Venn Diagram Generator PSB, VIB-Ghent University https://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/[] 
 
 Zen Black ZEISS Microscopy www.zeiss.com[] 
 
 Experimental models 
 
 Mouse: B6(C)-Ccr2 ^(tm1.1Cln/J) The Jackson Laboratory JAX: 027619 
 
 Mouse: C57BL/6j SPF Janvier Labs N/A 
 
 Mouse: B6-Clec4f^(hDTR/YFP-CIPHE) (Scott et al., 2016) N/A 
 
 Mouse: B6-Clec4f^(Cre-CIPHE) (Scott et al., 2018) N/A 
 
 Mouse: Alk1-flox (Park et al., 2008) N/A 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
Resource availability 
 
Lead contact 
 
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Martin Guilliams (martin.guilliams@irc.vib-ugent.be[]). 
 
Materials availability 
 
This study did not generate new unique reagents. 
 
Data and code availability 
 
The datasets generated during this study have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus public database under accession number GSE192742. 
 
Experimental model and subject details 
 
In vivo animal studies 
 
Mice 
 
WT C57Bl/6J mice (Janvier) were used for this study. Male and Female mice were used for all experiments, with the exception of NAFLD experiments were only male mice were used. For NAFLD experiments, mice were put on the SD or WD at 5 weeks of age and sacrificed after either 24 or 36 weeks on the diet as indicated. Fcgr1-Cre mice (Scott et al., 2018) were obtained from Prof. Bernard Malissen, CIML, Marseille and Clec4f-Cre mice (Scott et al., 2018) were crossed with Acvrl1^(fl/fl) mice (Park et al., 2008) obtained from Paul Oh, Barrow Neurological Institute, Florida, USA. Clec4f-Dtr mice (Scott et al., 2016) were crossed to CD45.1 mice (Janvier) for KC depletion and development experiments All mice were used between 6 and 12 weeks of age unless otherwise stated. All mice maintained at the VIB (Ghent University) under specific pathogen free conditions. All animals were randomly allocated to experimental groups. All experiments were performed in accordance with the ethical committee of the Faculty of Science, UGent and VIB. 
 
Pig 
 
Piglets (female, 10 weeks old) were purchased at a local farm and transported to the animal facilities of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine. The animals were housed in isolation units as blood donors and had access to feed and water ad libitum. At 30 weeks of age, the animals were euthanized by intravenous injection of sodium pentobarbital 20% (60mg/2.5kg) and livers were collected. The animal study was reviewed and approved by the Ethical Committee of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine (EC2018/55). 
 
Chicken 
 
Study animals were clinically healthy Leghorn hens of approximately 58 weeks old collected from a commercial farm. The hens were housed at the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine according to acceptable welfare standards and were observed at least twice daily for health problems. Feed and water was offered ad libitum. The chickens were euthanized through intravenous injection (in the wing) with sodium pentobarbital. The EC approval number of this trial was EC2019/015. 
 
Macaque 
 
Male Cynomolgus macaques (>=2 years) were sourced from China and supplied by Guangzhou Xiangguan Biotech Co., Ltd and confirmed healthy before being assigned to the study. Animal handling, husbandry and euthanasia was performed by WuxiAppTec Co., Ltd., China according to local ethical guidelines (AAALAC accredited 2010). Study animals consists of 4 groups, orally dosed once with a Janssen proprietary immune modulator or vehicle control. Vehicle control animals only were used in this study. Liver tissue samples were snap-frozen immediately after euthanasia. Samples were thawed once before shipping to Ghent for snRNA-seq analysis. 
 
Hamster 
 
Female syrian hamsters (Janvier) were housed per one or two in ventilated isolator cages at a temperature of 21degC, humidity of 55% and 12:12 dark/light cycles, with access to food and water ad libitum and cage enrichment. All hamsters had SPF status at arrival and manipulations were performed in a laminar flow cabinet. Housing conditions and experimental procedures were approved by the ethical committee of KU Leuven (license P015-2020). Animals were euthanized at 6-8 weeks of age by intraperitoneal injection of 200 mg/mL sodium pentobarbital and livers were collected for analysis. 
 
Zebrafish 
 
Zebrafish were maintained under standard conditions, according to FELASA guidelines (Alestrom et al., 2019). All experimental procedures were approved by the ethical committee for animal welfare (CEBEA) from the ULB (Universite Libre de Bruxelles) (Protocol #594N). The following transgenic lines at 6 months of age were used: Tg(mpeg1:EGFP)^(gl22) (Ellett et al., 2011); Tg(kdrl:Cre)^(s89) (Bertrand et al., 2010); Tg(actb2:loxP-STOP-loxP-DsRed^(express))^(sd5) (Bertrand et al., 2010) enabling macs to be sorted for sequencing as DsRed, GFP double positive cells. 
 
Patient studies 
 
Patient studies were run in collaboration with Ghent University Hospital. Liver biopsies (1-2mm3) were isolated with informed consent from patients undergoing cholecystectomy or gastric bypass. In addition, liver biopsies were isolated from healthy adjacent tissue removed during liver resection due to colorectal cancer metastasis. In most cases, a second biopsy was also taken to evaluate liver histology. A full overview of all patient samples used in this study can be found in Table S6. Paraffin-embedded human liver samples were obtained through collaboration with Dr. Jan Lerut (Universite Catholique de Louvain, UCL). All studies were performed in accordance with the ethical committee of the Ghent University Hospital (study numbers: 2015/1334 and 2017/0539). 
 
Method details 
 
Isolation of liver cells 
 
Liver cells were isolated by either ex vivo digestion (all species, except zebrafish) or in vivo liver perfusion (mice only) and digestion as described previously (Bonnardel et al., 2019; Scott et al., 2016). Briefly, for ex vivo digestion, livers were isolated, cut into small pieces and incubated with 1mg/ml Collagenase A and 10U/ml DNAse at 37^(deg)C for 20 mins with shaking. For in vivo digestion, after retrograde cannulation, livers were perfused for 1-2mins with an EGTA-containing solution, followed by a 5min (6ml/min) perfusion with 0.2mg/ml collagenase A. Livers were then removed, minced and incubated for 20mins with 0.4mg/ml collagenase A and 10U/ml DNase at 37degC. All subsequent procedures were performed at 4degC. Samples were filtered over a 100mm mesh filter and red blood cells were lysed. Samples were again filtered over a 40mm mesh filter. At this point in vivo digestion samples only were subjected to two centrifugation steps of 1 min at 50g to isolate hepatocytes. Remaining liver cells (leukocytes, LSECs and HSCs; in vivo protocol) and total cells from the ex vivo digests were centrifuged at 400g for 5mins before proceeding to antibody staining for flow cytometry. A combination of Collagenase A and DNase were used to digest livers in both protocols to minimize cleavage of surface epitopes. 
 
Dissected livers from 6 months old transgenic zebrafish were triturated and treated with Liberase TM at 33degC for 20 min. Cells were then filtered through 40mm nylon mesh and washed with 2% FBS in PBS by centrifugation. Sytox Red was then added to the samples at a final concentration of 5nM to exclude nonviable cells before proceeding to flow cytometry. DsRed+GFP+ cells were then FACS-purified. 
 
Isolation of liver nuclei 
 
Nuclei were isolated from snap frozen liver tissue with a sucrose gradient as previously described (Habib et al., 2016). Briefly, frozen liver tissue is homogenized using Kimble Douncer grinder set in 1ml homogenization buffer with RNAse inhibitors. Homogenised tissue is then is then subjected to density gradient (29% cushion - Optiprep) ultracentrifugation (7700rpm, 4^(deg)C, 30 mins). After resuspension, nuclei are stained with DAPI and intact nuclei were FACS-purified from remaining debris. 
 
Diet induced murine model of NAFLD/NASH 
 
To induce NAFLD and NASH, mice were fed a western diet (WD) high in fat, sugar and cholesterol for 24 or 36 weeks as described previously (Remmerie et al., 2020). This consisted of 58% fat, 1% cholesterol (Research Diets; D09061703i) and drinking water was supplemented with 23.1g/L fructose (MPBio) and 18.9g/L sucrose (VWR). Control mice were fed a standard diet with 11kcal% fat with corn starch (D12328i; Research Diets). 
 
Flow cytometry and cell sorting 
 
Cells were pre-incubated with 2.4G2 antibody (Bioceros) to block Fc receptors and stained with appropriate antibodies at 4degC in the dark for 30-45 minutes. Cell viability was assessed using Fixable Viability dyes (eFluor780 or eFluor506; Thermo Fischer) and cell suspensions were analyzed with a BD FACSymphony or purified using a BD Symphony S6, BD FACSAria II or III. Nuclei were sorted on basis of DAPI positivity and size. Analysis was performed with FlowJo software (BD). Intracellular staining for CD207 was performed by fixing and permeabilizing extracellularly stained cells according to the manufacturer's instructions using the FoxP3 Fixation/Permeabilization Kit (Thermo Fischer). 
 
Confocal microscopy 
 
Confocal staining was performed as described previously (Bonnardel et al., 2019). Immediately after sacrificing mice with CO2, inferior vena cava were cannulated and livers were perfused (4 mL/min) with Antigenfix (Diapath) for 5 min at room temperature. After excision, 2-3 mm slices of livers were fixed further by immersion in Antigenfix for 1h at 4degC, washed in PBS, infused overnight in 34% sucrose and frozen in Tissue-Tek OCT compound (Sakura Finetek). 20 mm-thick slices cut on a cryostat (Microm HM 560, Thermo Scientific) were rehydrated in PBS for 5 min, permeabilized with 0,5% saponin and non-specific binding sites were blocked for 30 min with 2% bovine serum albumin, 1% fetal calf serum and 1% donkey or goat serum for 30 minutes. Tissue sections were labeled overnight at 4degC with primary antibodies followed by incubation for 1h at room temperature with secondary antibodies. When two rat antibodies were used on the same section, the directly conjugated rat antibody was incubated for 1h after staining with the unconjugated and anti-rat secondary and after an additional blocking step with 1% rat serum for 30 minutes. Slides were mounted in ProLong Diamond, imaged with a Zeiss LSM780 confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) with spectral detector and using spectral unmixing and analyzed using ImageJ and QuPath software. 
 
Confocal microscopy combined with RNAScope 
 
Experiments were performed using the RNAScope Multiplex Fluorescent V2 Assay kit (ACDBio 323100). Probes targeting intronic regions for Hs-Cd5l (ACDBio 850511), Mfa-Cd5l (ACDBio 873211), Mm-Cd5l (ACDBio 573271), Mm-Flt3 (ACDBio 487861), Mm-Xcr1 (ACDBio 562371), Mm-Mafb (ACDBio 438531) and Mm-Mgl2-O1 (ACDBio 822901) were custom-designed and synthesized. They were then labelled with TSA opal 520 (PerkinElmer FP1487001KT), TSA opal 540 (PerkinElmer FP1494001KT), TSA opal 570 (PerkinElmer FP1488001KT), TSA opal 620 (PerkinElmer FP1495001KT) or TSA opal 650 (PerkinElmer FP1496001KT). Tissues were fixed for 16 hours in AntigenFix (Diapath P0016), dehydrated and embedded in OCT as described above. Slices were pre-treated with hydrogen peroxide for 10 min and protease III for 20 min. The recommended Antigen retrieval step was not performed in order to preserve epitope integrity. Probes were hybridized and amplified according to the manufacturer's instructions. Slides were then stained for protein markers as described above. 
 
Visium 
 
Mice were euthanized by means of carbon dioxide (CO2) overdose. The liver was excised and consequently trimmed, on ice, to smaller tissue pieces fitting the 10X Visium capture area. Trimmed tissue pieces were embedded in Tissue-Tek(r) O.C.T.^(TM) Compound (Sakura) and snap frozen in isopentane (Sigma) chilled by liquid nitrogen. Embedded tissue pieces where stored at -80degC until cryosectioning. 
 
A 10X Visium Spatial Gene expression slide was placed in the cryostat (Cryostar NX70 Thermo Fisher) 30 minutes prior to cutting. 10 mm sections where cut and placed within the capture area. Single 10X Visium Spatial Gene expression slides were stored in an airtight container at -80degC until further processing. 
 
10X Visium cDNA libraries were generated according the manufacturer's instructions. In short: Tissue sections where fixed in chilled Methanol. A H&E staining was performed to assess tissue morphology and quality. Tissue was lysed and reverse transcription was performed followed by second strand synthesis and cDNA denaturation. cDNA was transferred to a PCR tube and concentration was determined by qPCR. Spatially barcoded, full length cDNA was amplified by PCR. Indexed sequencing libraries where generated via End Repair, A-tailing, adaptor ligation and sample index PCR. Full length cDNA and indexed sequencing libraries were analyzed using the Qubit 4 fluorometer (Thermo Fisher) and Agilent 2100 BioAnalyzer. 
 
Visium highly multiplexed protein 
 
Liver slices were prepared as described above for the classical Visium protocol. Slices were dried for 1 min at 37degC and subsequently fixed using 1% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Next, slices were blocked for 30 min (2% BSA, 0.1ug/ul Salmon Sperm, 0.5% Saponin, 1 U/ml protector RNase inhibitor (Roche) in 3X SSC) and incubated with the oligo-conjugated antibody staining mix (2% BSA, 0.1mg/ml Salmon Sperm, 0.5% Saponin, 1 U/ml protector RNase inhibitor, 10uM polyT-blocking oligo (TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT^(*)T^(*)T^(*)/3InvdT/), in 3X SSC) for 1h at 4degC. Slides were mounted (90% glycerol, 1 U/ml protector RNase inhibitor) and imaged on Zeiss Axioscan Z1 at 20X magnification. Samples were then processed for a transcriptomic experiment as per manufacturer's instructions (Visium, 10X Genomics) with modifications to also capture antibody tags. In short, tissue was permeabilized using Tissue Removal Enzyme (Tissue Optimization kit, 10x Genomics) for 9 minutes, as determined by a tissue optimization experiment (10X Genomics, Visium Spatial Tissue Optimization). After reverse transcription, 2 ml of 100 mM FB additive primer (CCTTGGCACCCGAGAATT^(*)C^(*)C^(*)A) per sample was added to the second strand synthesis mix. During cDNA amplification 1 ml of 0,2 mM FB additive primer (CCTTGGCACCCGAGAATT^(*)C^(*)C^(*)A) was added. After cDNA amplification, antibody products and mRNA derived cDNA were separated by 0.6X SPRI select. The purified full-length cDNA fraction was quantified by qRT-PCR using KAPA SYBR FAST-qPCR kit on a PCR amplification and detection instrument. After enzymatic fragmentation indexed sequencing libraries were generated via End Repair, A-Tailing, adaptor ligation and sample index PCR. The supernatant containing antibody product was cleaned up by two rounds of 1.9X SPRI select. Next, 45 ml of the purified antibody fraction was amplified with a 96 deep well reaction module: 95degC for 3 min; cycled 8 times: 95degC for 20 s, 60degC for 30 s, and 72degC for 20 s; 72degC for 5 min; end at 4degC. ADT libraries were purified once more with 1.6X SPRI select. Full length cDNA, indexed cDNA libraries and antibody libraries were analyzed using the Qubit 4 fluorometer (Thermo Fisher) and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The separation of the cDNA and ADT libraries were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (10X genomics). 
 
MICS (MACSima^(T) Imaging Cyclic Staining) technology on the MACSima^(T) Imaging System by Miltenyi Biotec B.V. & Co. KG 
 
The MACSima(tm) Imaging System is a fully automated instrument combining liquid handling with widefield microscopy for cyclic immunofluorescence imaging. In brief, staining cycles consisted of the following automated steps: immunofluorescent staining, sample washing, multi-field imaging, and signal erasure (photobleaching or REAlease). 
 
Cryosectioned slices on slides were taken out of the -80degC storage and the appropriate MACSWell^(TM) imaging frame was mounted immediately on the slide. An appropriate volume of ice-cold 4% PFA solution was added (according to the MACSWell^(TM) imaging frames datasheet) and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature. The slide was washed three times with MACSima Running Buffer. After washing the appropriate initial sample volume of MACSima Running Buffer was added (according to the MACSWell^(TM) imaging frames datasheet). Right before the start of the MACSima ^(TM) instrument a DAPI pre-staining was performed: the MACSima Running Buffer was removed from the sample to be analysed and stained for 10 min with a 1:10 dilution of a DAPI staining solution (volume depends on working volume for the different MACSwell^(TM) formats, see datasheet). The DAPI staining solution was removed and 3 washing steps were performed (MACSima Running Buffer). Finally, the initial sample volume of MACSima Running Buffer was added. Details of the antibodies used can be found in the key resources table. 
 
Molecular cartography^(TM) 
 
Tissue sections 
 
Liver was frozen and sectioned as described above for Visium analysis and liver slices were placed within capture areas on Resolve BioScience slides. Samples were then sent to Resolve BioSciences on dry ice for analysis. Upon arrival, tissue sections were thawed and fixed with 4% v/v Formaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich F8775) in 1x PBS for 30 min at 4 degC. After fixation, sections were washed twice in 1x PBS for two min, followed by one min washes in 50% Ethanol and 70% Ethanol at room temperature. Fixed samples were used for Molecular Cartography^(TM) (100-plex combinatorial single molecule fluorescence in-situ hybridization) according to the manufacturer's instructions (protocol 3.0; available for download from Resolve's website to registered users), starting with the aspiration of ethanol and the addition of buffer BST1 (step 6 and 7 of the tissue priming protocol). Briefly, tissues were primed followed by overnight hybridization of all probes specific for the target genes (see below for probe design details and target list). Samples were washed the next day to remove excess probes and fluorescently tagged in a two-step color development process. Regions of interest were imaged as described below and fluorescent signals removed during decolorization. Color development, imaging and decolorization were repeated for multiple cycles to build a unique combinatorial code for every target gene that was derived from raw images as described below. 
 
Probe Design 
 
The probes for 100 genes were designed using Resolve's proprietary design algorithm. Briefly, the probe-design was performed at the gene-level. For every targeted gene all full-length protein-coding transcript sequences from the ENSEMBL database were used as design targets if the isoform had the GENCODE annotation tag 'basic' (Frankish et al., 2019; Yates et al., 2020). To speed up the process, the calculation of computationally expensive parts, especially the off-target searches, the selection of probe sequences was not performed randomly, but limited to sequences with high success rates. To filter highly repetitive regions, the abundance of k-mers was obtained from the background transcriptome using Jellyfish (Marcais and Kingsford, 2011). Every target sequence was scanned once for all k-mers, and those regions with rare k-mers were preferred as seeds for full probe design. A probe candidate was generated by extending a seed sequence until a certain target stability was reached. A set of simple rules was applied to discard sequences that were found experimentally to cause problems. 
 
After these fast screens, every kept probe candidate was mapped to the background transcriptome using ThermonucleotideBLAST (Gans and Wolinsky, 2008) and probes with stable off-target hits were discarded. Specific probes were then scored based on the number of on-target matches (isoforms), which were weighted by their associated APPRIS level (Rodriguez et al., 2018), favoring principal isoforms over others. A bonus was added if the binding-site was inside the protein-coding region. From the pool of accepted probes, the final set was composed by greedily picking the highest scoring probes. Probe details are included in the key resources table. 
 
Imaging 
 
Samples were imaged on a Zeiss Celldiscoverer 7, using the 50x Plan Apochromat water immersion objective with an NA of 1.2 and the 0.5x magnification changer, resulting in a 25x final magnification. Standard CD7 LED excitation light source, filters, and dichroic mirrors were used together with customized emission filters optimized for detecting specific signals. Excitation time per image was 1000 ms for each channel (DAPI was 20 ms). A z-stack was taken at each region with a distance per z-slice according to the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem. The custom CD7 CMOS camera (Zeiss Axiocam Mono 712, 3.45 mm pixel size) was used. 
 
For each region, a z-stack per fluorescent color (two colors) was imaged per imaging round. A total of 8 imaging rounds were done for each position, resulting in 16 z-stacks per region. The completely automated imaging process per round (including water immersion generation and precise relocation of regions to image in all three dimensions) was realized by a custom python script using the scripting API of the Zeiss ZEN software (Open application development). 
 
Spot segmentation 
 
The algorithms for spot segmentation were written in Java and are based on the ImageJ library functionalities. Only the iterative closest point algorithm is written in C++ based on the libpointmatcher library (https://github.com/ethz-asl/libpointmatcher[]). 
 
Preprocessing 
 
As a first step all images were corrected for background fluorescence. A target value for the allowed number of maxima was determined based upon the area of the slice in mm2 multiplied by the factor 0.5. This factor was empirically optimized. The brightest maxima per plane were determined, based upon an empirically optimized threshold. The number and location of the respective maxima was stored. This procedure was done for every image slice independently. Maxima that did not have a neighboring maximum in an adjacent slice (called z-group) were excluded. The resulting maxima list was further filtered in an iterative loop by adjusting the allowed thresholds for (Babs-Bback) and (Bperi-Bback) to reach a feature target value (Babs: absolute brightness, Bback: local background, Bperi: background of periphery within 1 pixel). This feature target values were based upon the volume of the 3D-image. Only maxima still in a z-group of at least 2 after filtering were passing the filter step. Each z-group was counted as one hit. The members of the z-groups with the highest absolute brightness were used as features and written to a file. They resemble a 3D-point cloud. 
 
Final signal segmentation and decoding 
 
To align the raw data images from different imaging rounds, images had to be corrected. To do so the extracted feature point clouds were used to find the transformation matrices. For this purpose, an iterative closest point cloud algorithm was used to minimize the error between two point-clouds. The point clouds of each round were aligned to the point cloud of round one (reference point cloud). The corresponding point clouds were stored for downstream processes. Based upon the transformation matrices the corresponding images were processed by a rigid transformation using trilinear interpolation. 
 
The aligned images were used to create a profile for each pixel consisting of 16 values (16 images from two color channels in 8 imaging rounds). The pixel profiles were filtered for variance from zero normalized by total brightness of all pixels in the profile. Matched pixel profiles with the highest score were assigned as an ID to the pixel. 
 
Pixels with neighbors having the same ID were grouped. The pixel groups were filtered by group size, number of direct adjacent pixels in group, number of dimensions with size of two pixels. The local 3D-maxima of the groups were determined as potential final transcript locations. Maxima were filtered by number of maxima in the raw data images where a maximum was expected. Remaining maxima were further evaluated by the fit to the corresponding code. The remaining maxima were written to the results file and considered to resemble transcripts of the corresponding gene. The ratio of signals matching to codes used in the experiment and signals matching to codes not used in the experiment were used as estimation for specificity (false positives). 
 
Downstream analysis 
 
Final image analysis was performed in ImageJ using genexyz Polylux tool plugin from Resolve BioSciences to examine specific Molecular Cartography^(TM) signals. 
 
RNA sequencing, CITE-seq, and qPCR 
 
Sorting and RNA Isolation 
 
40000-160000 cells of interest from livers of the different species were FACS-purified and pelleted by centrifugation at 400g for 5 mins. To ensure sufficient numbers of all cell types were present in our analyses, depending on the sample distinct populations of cells including Live CD45+, Live CD45-, Hepatocytes, Myeloid cells and Stromal cells were FACS-purified. When CITE-seq was to be performed, cells were then stained with 2.4G2 antibody to block Fc receptors and CITE-seq antibodies for 20mins at 4degC, before being washed in excess PBS with 2% FCS and 2mM EDTA. Antibody details are included in the key resources table. 40000-100000 nuclei were also FACS-purified based on DAPI expression. These were sorted into BSA coated tubes and pelleted by centrifuging for 3 mins at 400g and 5 mins at 600g sequentially. Cells/Nuclei were then resuspended in PBS with 0.04%BSA at ~1000 cells/ml. Cell suspensions (target recovery of 8000-10000 cells) were loaded on a GemCode Single-Cell Instrument (10x Genomics, Pleasanton, CA, USA) to generate single-cell Gel Bead-in-Emulsions (GEMs). Single-cell RNA-Seq libraries were prepared using GemCode Single-Cell 3'Gel Bead and Library Kit (10x Genomics, V2 and V3 technology) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, GEM-RT was performed in a 96-Deep Well Reaction Module: 55degC for 45min, 85degC for 5 min; end at 4degC. After RT, GEMs were broken down and the cDNA was cleaned up with DynaBeads MyOne Silane Beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 37002D) and SPRIselect Reagent Kit (SPRI; Beckman Coulter; B23318). cDNA was amplified with 96-Deep Well Reaction Module: 98degC for 3 min; cycled 12 times : 98degC for 15s, 67degC for 20 s, and 72degC for 1 min; 72degC for 1 min; end at 4degC. Amplified cDNA product was cleaned up with SPRIselect Reagent Kit prior to enzymatic fragmentation. Indexed sequencing libraries were generated using the reagents in the GemCode Single-Cell 3' Library Kit with the following intermediates: (1) end repair; (2) A-tailing; (3) adapter ligation; (4) post-ligation SPRIselect cleanup and (5) sample index PCR. Pre-fragmentation and post-sample index PCR samples were analyzed using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 
 
qPCR 
 
RNA was extracted from 10000 sorted cells (gated using strategies shown) from livers of C57BL/6 mice using a RNeasy Plus micro kit (QIAGEN). Sensifast cDNA synthesis kit (Bioline) was used to transcribe total RNA to cDNA. Real-time RT-PCR using SensiFast SYBR No-Rox kit (Bioline) was performed to determine gene expression, therefore a PCR amplification and detection instrument LightCycler 480 (Roche) was used. Gene expression was normalized to b-actin gene expression. Primers used in the study can be found in the key resources table. 
 
RNA sequencing analysis 
 
sc/snRNA-seq libraries were loaded on an Illumina HiSeq or Illumina NovaSeq 6000 with sequencing settings recommended by 10X Genomics (26/8/0/98 - 2.1pM loading concentration, ADT and cDNA libraries were pooled in a 25:75 ratio). Visium sequencing libraries were loaded on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 with sequencing settings recommended by 10X Genomics (28/10/10/75 - 2.1pM loading concentration). Sequencing was performed at the VIB Nucleomics Core (VIB, Leuven). The demultiplexing of the raw data was performed using CellRanger software (10x - version 3.1.0; cellranger mkfastq which wraps Illumina's bcl2fastq). The reads obtained from the demultiplexing were used as the input for 'cellranger count' (CellRanger software), which aligns the reads to the mouse reference genome (mm10) using STAR and collapses to unique molecular identifier (UMI) counts. The result is a large digital expression matrix with cell barcodes as rows and gene identities as columns. 
 
Preprocessing data 
 
To remove ambient RNA, the FastCAR R package (v0.1.0) with a contamination chance cutoff of 0.05 was run on the samples separately before merging them. The UMI cut off was determined individually for the different samples, using the CellRanger web_summary output plot (see GitHub). The Scater R package (v1.14.6) was used for the preprocessing of the data. The workflow to identify the outliers, based on 3 metrics (library size, number of expressed genes and mitochondrial proportion) described by the Marioni lab (Lun et al., 2016) was followed. As a first step cells with a value x median absolute deviation (MADs) higher or lower than the median value for each metric were removed. This value was determined individually for the different datasets (see github). Secondly, the runPCA function (default parameters) of the Scater R package was used to generate a principal component analysis (PCA) plot. The outliers in this PCA plot were identified by the R package mvoutlier. By creating the Seurat object, genes that didn't have an expression in at least 3 cells were removed. To normalize, scale and detecting the highly variable genes, the R package SCTransform (v0.2.1) was used. If batch correction (on sample level) was needed, the NormalizeData (log2 transformation), FindVariableFeatures and ScaleData functions of the Seurat R package (v3.1.2) were used in combination with the Harmony R package (v1.0). The Seurat pipeline was followed to find the clusters and create the UMAP plots. The number of principal components used for the clustering and the resolution were determined individually for the different datasets (see GitHub). On these initial UMAP plots we did multiple rounds of cleaning by removing proliferating and contaminating (e.g. doublets) cells. For non CITE-seq datasets the count data for the clean cells acquired by the previous steps were further processed with the scVI model (scvi Python package v0.6.7) (Lopez et al., 2018). Datasets including Cite-seq samples were further processed with the TotalVI model (Gayoso et al., 2021). The workflows described on scvi-tools.org were followed to generate new UMAPs, DEGs and DEPs. This information was further processed with the pheatmap R package (v1.0.12) to create heatmaps using the normalized values (denoised genes) calculated in the scVI/TotalVI workflow. The plots showing the expression of certain genes or proteins are created with the ggplot2 R package (v3.2.1) with a quantile cut off of 0.01. 
 
For mouse all the ABs from the whitelist (181 ABs) were loaded into TotalVI, while for the other species only the added ABs were loaded into TotalVI. For the 'human liver-pool of techniques and patients' we noticed that the batch correction (between samples) faced difficulties for the hepatocytes and stellate cells as the cells all originated from snRNA-Seq samples, while the other cell types originated from both snRNA-seq and scRNA-seq samples. To overcome this issue we randomly allocated 30% of the hepatocytes to scRNA-seq samples which were not CITE-seq samples. We did the same for 30% of the stellate cells. 
 
Heatmaps were made by scaling the normalized values (denoised values; calculated in the scVI/TotalVI workflow) using the scale_quantile function of the SCORPIUS R package (v1.0.7) and the pheatmap R package (v1.0.12). The plots showing the expression of certain genes or proteins were created based on the normalized values (denoised values) using a quantile cutoff of 0.99 and via either the ggplot2 R package (v3.2.1) or the scanpy.pl.umap function of the Scanpy Python package (v1.5.1). 
 
Conserved human-mouse KC signature 
 
To find the conserved human and mouse KC markers we started by identifying the human KC markers. We mapped the annotation of the human myeloid UMAP on the human pool of techniques/patients UMAP to identify the real KCs in this last UMAP. The real KCs were identified as the top part of the mac cluster. Using this new annotation we then calculated the DE genes and DE proteins for each cluster. Some genes are listed as marker for multiple clusters, only for the cluster where the gene had the highest score (raw_normalized_mean1/raw_normalized_mean2^(*)lfc_mean), the gene was kept as marker. This way we found 110 potential human KC markers. We then created a heatmap of these 110 genes (using denoised gene values scaled between 0 and 1) and filtered this heatmap by removing the genes where the scaled normalized value was higher than 0.50 in more than 30% of the cells of a certain cell type other than KCs. Except for the macs, we only removed a gene when it had a scaled normalized value higher than 0.50 in more than 70% of the macs. After this filtering we ended up with 36 human KC markers. Next we converted these human gene symbols into MGI IDs via the BioMart tool on the HGNC website (https://biomart.genenames.org/martform/#!/default/HGNC?datasets=hgnc_gene_mart[]). We found a MGI ID for 30 genes. We then converted these MGI IDs into mouse gene symbols via the MGI webtool (http://www.informatics.jax.org/batch/[]). 
 
To identify the mouse KC markers we similarly mapped the annotation of the mouse myeloid UMAP on the mouse pool of techniques UMAP to identify the real KCs in this last UMAP. The real KCs matched with the mac cluster. Similarly as in human, the DE genes for each cluster was calculated and genes listed as marker for multiple clusters were dealt with in a similar way. This way we found 264 potential mouse KC markers. We then removed the genes that had a score (raw_normalized_mean1/raw_normalized_mean2^(*)lfc_mean) lower than 10 and ended up with 214 genes. We then created a heatmap of these 214 genes (using denoised gene values scaled between 0 and 1) and filtered this heatmap by removing the genes where the scaled normalized value was higher than 0.50 in more than 30% of the cells of a certain cell type other than KCs. After this filtering we ended up with 68 mouse KC markers. Next we converted these mouse gene symbols into MGI IDs via the MGI webtool (http://www.informatics.jax.org/batch/[]). We then converted these MGI IDs into human gene symbols via the BioMart tool on the HGNC website (https://biomart.genenames.org/martform/#!/default/HGNC?datasets=hgnc_gene_mart[]) and ended up with 60 genes. 
 
At this point we found 30 human KC markers and 60 mouse KC markers. In a next step, we only kept the human KC markers that we identified as a Highly Variable Gene (HVG) in the mouse pool of techniques UMAP (20 genes) and the mouse KC markers that were identified as HVGs in the human pool of the techniques UMAP (30 genes). We next put these 20 mouse KC markers in SingleCellSignatureExplorer (Pont et al., 2019) to see where these genes are enriched in the mouse pool of techniques UMAP. In order to only get an enrichment in the KCs we decided to only use top 10 mouse KC markers (ordered on score), together with Slc40a1 and Hmox1. We then started to add the top human KC markers as long as we keep the enrichment solely in the KCs. This way we ended up with final list of 15 human-mouse conserved KC markers. 
 
We next converted these KC markers into the monkey, pig, chicken or zebrafish orthologs by looking up the human gene symbol on NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/search/[]) and checking if there is an ortholog of the species of interest listed under the 'Ortholog' tab. The found orthologs were then used as input for the SingleCellSignatureExplorer tool. 
 
Conversion of the CITE-seq data into a flow cytometry file 
 
The protein normalized values (denoised values; calculated in the TotalVI workflow) were converted into an FCS file using the write.FCS function of the flowCore R package (v1.50.0). 
 
Preprocessing Visium data 
 
We first removed per sample all spots that were clear outliers compared to the location of the tissue. Each sample was then normalized individually using the SCTransform function of the Seurat R package (v3.2.3) with default parameters. All samples were then merged with the merge function of the Seurat R package (v3.2.3) with default parameters. Next, we determined the HVGs, created a PCA plot, performed clustering and created an UMAP plot as described in the spatial workflow available on the Seurat website (https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/spatial_vignette.html[]). Clusters which showed high mitochondrial gene expression were removed. Spots located at the darker parts of the tissue were also removed as these parts are considered to be dead tissue or of bad quality. 
 
Modelling of Visium data 
 
Probabilistic graphical modeling 
 
For modelling the cell type composition and zonation, spatial CITE-seq and transcriptomics data were analyzed using probabilistic graphical models, similar to what is used in tools such as cell2location and scVI. In brief, transcriptomics data was modelled as a NegativeBinomial distribution, parameterized with a mean []m 
 
and dispersion []th 
 
, the latter optimized as a free parameter for each gene. Visium Highly Multiplexed Protein data was modelled as a mixture of NegativeBinomials, with a []m_(background) 
 
and []m_(foreground) 
 
and a shared dispersion []th 
 
. The actual foreground/background signal within a modality was modelled as a []r 
 
that depends on the latent space, and which is multiplied with the empirical library size to get []m 
 
. For Visium Highly Multiplexed Protein, []r_(background) 
 
was modelled as a latent variable specific for each gene. []r_(foreground) 
 
for Visium Highly Multiplexed Protein and []r 
 
for RNA-seq were modelled as deterministic functions depending on the use case as described in the following paragraphs. The posterior of the probabilistic graphical model was inferred using black-box variational inference (Ranganath et al., 2013), in which the variational distribution was specified as a diagonal Normal distribution, transformed into the correct domain using transforms ([]R - R+ : e^(x) 
 
, []$\left. \mathbb{R}\ \rightarrow\Delta:\frac{e^{x_{i}}}{\sum_{i}e^{x_{i}}} \right.$ 
 
, []$\left. \mathbb{R}\ \rightarrow\lbrack 0,1\rbrack:\frac{e^{x}}{e^{x} + 1} \right.$ 
 
). Free parameters within this model were optimized using gradient descent, with the ELBO as loss function and Adam as optimizer as implemented in Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019) (pytorch.org[]). We used a learning rate of 0.01 for variational parameters, and 0.001 for parameters of the amortization functions. 
 
Reference for deconvolution 
 
To calculate the average expression of each gene within a cell type, we used a linear model in which both []r 
 
and []th 
 
were modelled as a latent variable specific for each gene and cell type. The []r 
 
for nuclei were multiplied with a gene-specific correction factor (optimized as a latent variable) that corrected for differences between scRNA-seq and snRNA-seq. Given that spatial transcriptomics data sequences the whole cell, the uncorrected []r 
 
values were used for spatial deconvolution. 
 
Deconvolution 
 
To infer the proportions of each cell type within a spot, we used a model in which the gene expression is modelled as a linear combination of cell type proportions and average expression in each cell type: 
 
[]r_(spot, gene) = n_(spot, celltype) x r_(celltype, gene) 
 
For []r_(celltype, gene) 
 
we adapted the values from the reference, but included 
 
- 
 - A capture bias per gene, which corrects for technical and biological differences between spatial and sc/sn-RNA-seq. The capture bias was modelled as a latent variable with prior []Normal(0, 1) 
- 
 - A red blood cell cell type, which was not included in the reference dataset but nonetheless had a dominant presence in the spatial data. The []r 
 of this cell type was set to zero for all genes except Hbb-bt, Hbb-bs, Hba-a1, Hba-a2 for mouse and HBB, HBA1, HBA2 for human, which were modelled as free parameters. 
- 
 - Similarly, the expression of complement factors (C3, C2, C4B/C4b) within hepatocytes was modelled as free parameters. 
 
A background signal shared for all spots was also modelled as follows: 
 
[]m_(spot, gene) = r_(spot, gene) x lib x foreground + m_(background) 
 
With []foreground [0, 1] 
 
a latent variable specific to each spot and []m_(background) R 
 
a latent variable specific to each gene. 
 
A likelihood ratio test was used to assess whether a cell type was significantly present in a spot. Specifically, if []x 
 
is the gene expression of all genes at a particular spot, we used Monte Carlo samples from the posterior to estimate:[]$\frac{P\left( x \middle| \nu_{celltype} \right)}{P\left( x \middle| \nu_{celltype} = \ 0 \right)}$ 
 
A cell type was deemed significantly present if the log-likelihood was higher than 10. 
 
Zonation 
 
The zonation of spots was modelled as a univariate latent variable []z ~ Uniform(0, 1) 
 
specific to each spot. This latent variable influenced the gene expression []r 
 
using a spline function by using a gaussian basis function ([]s = 0.05 
 
) with 10 knots at uniform fixed positions. The coefficients of this spline were modelled as a latent variable specific for each gene, with prior a Gaussian random walk distribution, and the step []~ Normal(0, s_(gene)) 
 
. []s_(gene) 
 
was determined empirically as 2 times the standard deviation of the log1p transformed expression values in the whole dataset. The variational parameters of the zonation []m_(z) 
 
and []s_(z) 
 
were not optimized directly but were estimated using an amortization function. This amortization function used the count matrix as input, and estimated the variational parameters using the following layers: Linear (with 100 output dimensions), BatchNorm, ReLU, Linear (again with 100 output dimensions), ReLU, and a final Linear layer. This amortization function was used to transfer the zonation onto a different dataset, i.e., 1) to transfer the zonation trained on mouse spatial transcriptomics onto mouse Visium highly multiplexed protein and 2) to transfer the zonation trained on human low steatosis (<10%) onto human high steatosis (>30%). 
 
Differential abundance along zonation 
 
To determine the differential abundance of a cell type across zonation, the significant presence of a cell type within a spot [] {0, 1} 
 
was modelled using a spline function with the zonation of a cell type as input. The coefficients of this spline function were modelled as a latent variable with the step size []~ Normal(0, 1) 
 
. To determine differences in abundance between patients with high and low steatosis, we first modelled the zonation on human data on patients with steatosis < 10%. Potential interaction effects between zonation and steatosis status were then modelled using a spline function as before, but with a separate set of coefficients for both high and low steatosis. A likelihood ratio test was then used to determine whether this interaction was present significantly, by comparing the likelihood of this model with a model with shared coefficients. 
 
Differential NicheNet 
 
To analyze cell-cell communication in the hepatic mac niches, we applied Differential NicheNet, which is an extension of the default NicheNet pipeline to compare cell-cell interactions between different niches and better predict niche-specific ligand-receptor (L-R) pairs. It uses a flexible prioritization scheme that allows ranking L-R pairs according to several properties, such as niche- and region-specific expression of the L-R pair, ligand activity, and level of database curation. This in contrast to the default NicheNet pipeline which prioritizes expressed L-R pairs solely based on ligand activity predictions. All analyses were conducted according to the Differential NicheNet tutorial (https://github.com/saeyslab/nichenetr/blob/master/vignettes/differential_nichenet.md[]). As input to the Differential NicheNet pipeline, we used the data after normalization via SCTransform and integration of scRNA-seq and snRNA-seq according to the Seurat procedure for integration (Stuart et al., 2019). 
 
For the mouse analyses, Differential NicheNet was first performed for the following 3 niche comparisons: 1) KCs versus central vein macs; 2) KCs versus capsule macs; 3) KCs versus LAMs. Following sender cell types were considered for these niches: KC niche: periportal hepatocytes, periportal LSECs, and periportal stellate cells; Central vein mac niche: central vein ECs and central vein fibroblasts; Capsule mac niche: mesothelial cells and capsule fibroblasts; LAM niche: cholangiocytes and bile duct fibroblasts. 
 
Because of the preferentially periportal localization of KCs in the mouse liver, we also included a 'region specificity' factor in the Differential NicheNet prioritization framework. This was done to increase the ranking of ligands that are more strongly expressed in periportal than pericentral niche cells. Periportal sender cells were determined after subclustering based on the following markers: Hal and Sds for hepatocytes; Mecom, Msr1, and Efnb2 for LSECs; Ngfr, Igfbp3, and Dach1 for stellate cells. 
 
In the heatmap (Figure S8G), we show the prioritization scores of the top 40 ligands (and their highest scoring receptor) in the KC niche (score averaged over the 3 analyses), and of all the non-KC niche L-R pairs with a prioritization score >= the score of the lowest scoring KC L-R pair of this top 40. For each L-R pair/niche combination, we only displayed the score of the sender cell with the highest score (e.g. for the Csf1-Csf1r interaction in the KC niche, the score is shown for the LSEC-KC interaction because that score was higher than for Stellate-KC and Hepatocyte-KC; in the LAM niche, the score of Csf1-Csf1r is shown for the bile duct fibroblast - LAM interaction and not for the cholangiocyte-LAM interaction, etc.). 
 
Because of the strong concordance between the top-ranked L-R pairs in these 3 non-KC mac niches, it was decided to also conduct a subsequent analysis in which the KC niche is compared against all non-KC hepatic mac niches combined. For this final 'KC versus all non-KC mac analysis', KCs were compared to central vein macs, capsule macs, and LAMs together, with the same sender cell types as described here above (but now analyzed together). 
 
For the human analyses, Differential NicheNet was performed to compare the KC niche with the non-KC mac niches (similarly as the final analysis in mouse). For the KC niche, all hepatocytes, LSECs, and stellate cells were selected as sender cells; and KCs as receiver cells. For the non-KC mac niche, cholangiocytes, fibroblasts, and central vein ECs were considered as the sender cells; Mat. LAMs, Imm. LAMs, and Mac1s as the receiver cells (Figure 4H). 
 
To find KC-niche-specific L-R pairs that are conserved across mouse and human, the individual mouse and human prioritization scores were averaged to form a 'conservation score'. The 40 ligands (and maximally 3 of their highest scoring receptors) with the highest conservation score were selected for further analysis (note: the L-R pair should be expressed by the same sender-receiver pair in both species). In the circos plot (Figure 6C; Gu et al., 2014), only a subset of these top L-R pairs is shown to keep the figure clearly interpretable. Following ligands were not shown: ITGA9, SEMA6D, JAM3, ITGB1 (stellate cells); ITGA9, F8, CD274, HSP90B1 (LSECs); C5, F9, F2, FGA, TF, TTR, COL18A1, COL5A3, SERPINA1, SERPINC1 (hepatocytes). The depicted target genes are KC-specific in both mouse and human, and a top-predicted target according to the NicheNet ligand-target regulatory potential scores. NR1H3 was manually added as a NOTCH2 target based on recent studies (Bonnardel et al., 2019). 
 
Staining of human liver paraffin sections 
 
Resected human liver was fixed in 4% formalin for 24-48h and subsequently embedded in paraffin. Samples were stored for 10-15 years at RT before analysis. Sections of 6 mm thick were cut using a Microm HM360 and mounted on a polarized glass slide. These sections were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in a graded ethanol series. Antigen retrieval was performed by immersing the samples for 5 min in pH 8.3 TRIS-EDTA at 98degC. Slides were then cooled to RT and washed in PBS. Confocal staining was performed as described above. 
 
Isolation and culture of BM monocytes with acetylated LDL 
 
BM was isolated from the tibia and femur of mice by centrifugation. Red blood cells were lysed and single cell suspensions were stained with antibodies for flow cytometry. BM monocytes were sorted as live CD45+ CD11b+ Ly6G- Ly6C+ CD115+ cells using a BD FACSAria III. Monocytes were resuspended in DMEM/F12 media supplemented with 10% FCS, 30ng/ml CSF1, 2mM Glutamine and 100U/ml penicillin and streptomycin. 150,000 monocytes were seeded in each well of an adherent 24-well plate pre-coated with bovine collagen type I and cultured overnight (37C, 5% CO2). The following day 0, 25 or 50ng/ml of ac-LDL was added. Ac-LDL was kindly provided by Sophie Janssens, Ghent, Belgium who received the material from Wilfried Le Goff, Paris, France. 14 hours later cells were harvested and live F4/80+ cells were FACS-purified in RLT plus buffer containing 1% b-mercaptoethanol. RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and qPCR were performed as described above. 
 
Generation of bone marrow chimeras 
 
Bone marrow chimeras were generated as described previously (Scott et al., 2016). Briefly, 6-12 week old Clec4f-Dtr mice (CD45.1) were anaesthetized by intraperitoneal administration of Ketamine (150 mg/kg) and Xylazine (10 mg/kg). Mice were lethally irradiated with 8 Gy, with the livers being protected with a 3-cm-thick lead cover. Once recovered from the anesthesia, mice were reconstituted by intravenous administration of 5-10x106 BM cells from CD45.2 Acvrl1^(fl/fl) or Fcgr1-CrexAcvrl1^(fl/f)l mice. 4 weeks after reconstitution mice were administrated a single dose of 500ng DT via intraperitoneal injection to deplete KCs. Chimerism was assessed 7 or 13 days later by flow cytometry and compared with chimerism levels in blood Ly6C^(hi) monocytes. 
 
Administration of Fc traps 
 
Clec4f-Dtr mice were administered 10mg/kg ALK1Fc, TGFbRIIFc or appropriate isotype controls (hIgG1 and mIgG2a; Acceleron Pharma) by intraperitoneal injection on days -1, 2, 3 and 5. On Day 0 mice were also administered a single dose of 500ng DT i.p. to deplete KCs. Livers were harvested at day 7 to assess KC development. 
 
Quantification and statistical analysis 
 
In all experiments, data are presented as mean +-SEM and/or individual data points are presented unless stated otherwise. Statistical tests were selected based on appropriate assumptions with respect to data distribution and variance characteristics. Details of the precise test used for each analysis can be found in the figure legends. Statistical significance was defined as p<0.05. Sample sizes were chosen according to standard guidelines. Number of animals/patients is indicated as ''n''. The investigators were not blinded to the group allocation, unless otherwise stated. 
 
Additional resources 
 
The sc/snRNA-sequencing, CITE-seq FCS files and spatial transcriptomics datasets will be made available for visualization, analysis and download at www.livercellatlas.org[]. 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
We thank all patients and their families for participating in this study. We also thank Janssen for providing the macaque samples; Acceleron Pharma for the kind gift of the ALK1-Fc, TGFBRII-Fc, and isotype controls; the IRC-VIB Flow and Bioimaging core facilities for assistance; VIB Tech Watch and the VIB single-cell accelerator program for their help benchmarking technologies; and 10X Genomics for their help setting up the Visium highly multiplexed protein analysis. Finally, we thank the VIB-UGent animal house staff. BioRender was used to generate some figures. 
 
Funding: Chan Zuckerberg initiative; liver seed atlas grant (M.G. and C.L.S.), FWO SBO; iPSC LiMics (C.L.S., M.G., and Y.S.), ERC consolidator grant; KupfferCellNiche, 725924 (M.G.), GOA; BOF18-GOA-024 (M.G. and Y.S.), ERC starting grant; MyeFattyLiver, 851908 (C.L.S.), FWO project grant; 3G000519, (C.L.S. and M.G.), FWO PhD fellowship; 1129521N (B.H.), 1181318N (R.B.), 11L2122N (F.F.D.P.), MSCA IF fellowships; MACtivate 101027317 (C.Z.), LiverMacRegenCircuit 844301 (F.R.S.). 
 
Author contributions 
 
Conceptualization & data curation: C.L.S. and M.G.; formal analysis: C.L.S., M.G., T.T., L.M., B.H., F.R.S., F.F.D.P., A.R., J.B., W.S., and R.B.; funding acquisition: C.L.S. and M.G.; investigation: C.L.S., M.G., B.H., J.B., B.V.D.B., A.B., F.F.D.P., A.R., C.Z., B.V., T.V., L.M., T.T., R.B., A.H., A.V., F.B., Y.V., E.C., G.F., V.W., A.W., S.K., J.N., K.D., P.G., and S.C.; methodology: C.L.S., M.G., B.H., J.B., L.M., T.T., F.F.D.P., R.B., W.S., A.B., A.G., and S.L.; visualization: C.L.S., M.G., J.B., B.H., L.M., T.T., R.B., and W.S.; resources: C.L.S., M.G., W.S., B.D., and Y.S.; supervision: C.L.S., M.G., H.V.V., L.D., B.D., W.S., and Y.S.; writing: C.L.S. and M.G. 
 
Declaration of interests 
 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
Supplemental information 
 
[]Download all supplementary files included with this article 
 
[]What's this?[] 
 
[]Download: Download spreadsheet (3MB) 
 
Table S1. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and proteins (DEPs) per cell type in total mouse and human liver cell atlases, related to Figures 1, 4, S2, and S6. 
 
[]Download: Download spreadsheet (680KB) 
 
Table S2. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and proteins (DEPs) per cell type in mouse and human myeloid cell atlases, related to Figures 2, 4, 5, S3, S6, and S8. 
 
[]Download: Download spreadsheet (2MB) 
 
Table S3. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and proteins (DEPs) per cell type in mouse and human CD45- cell atlases, related to Figures 3, 6, and S4. 
 
[]Download: Download spreadsheet (287KB) 
 
Table S4. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) per cell type in mouse stromal cell atlas, related to Figures 3 and S4. 
 
[]Download: Download spreadsheet (684KB) 
 
Table S5. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and proteins (DEPs) per cell type in mouse lymphoid cell atlas, related to Figures 1, 4, and S5. 
 
[]Download: Download spreadsheet (37KB) 
 
Table S6. Clinical data from patient liver biopsies used in the study, related to Figure 4. 
 
[]Download: Download spreadsheet (310KB) 
 
Table S7. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and proteins (DEPs) per cell type in mouse NAFLD lymphoid cell atlas, related to Figures 5 and S5. 
 
[]Download: Download spreadsheet (371KB) 
 
Table S8. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and proteins (DEPs) per cell type in mouse NAFLD myeloid cell atlas, related to Figures 5 and S6. 
 
[]Download: Download spreadsheet (2MB) 
 
Table S9. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and proteins (DEPs) per cell type in liver cell atlases from macaque, pig, hamster, chicken, and zebrafish, related to Figures 4 and S7. 
 
[]Download: Download spreadsheet (67KB) 
 
Table S10. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) per cell type in mouse NAFLD stromal cell atlas, related to Figure 6. 
 
Special issue articles 
 
Recommended articles 
 
References 
 
1. Aizarani et al., 2019 
 N. Aizarani, A. Saviano, L. Sagar, Mailly, S. Durand, J.S. Herman, P. Pessaux, T.F. Baumert, D. Grun 
 
 A human liver cell atlas reveals heterogeneity and epithelial progenitors 
 
 Nature, 572 (2019), pp. 199-204 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
2. Ashburner et al., 2000 
 M. Ashburner, C.A. Ball, J.A. Blake, D. Botstein, H. Butler, J.M. Cherry, A.P. Davis, K. Dolinski, S.S. Dwight, J.T. Eppig, et al. 
 
 Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium 
 
 Nat. Genet., 25 (2000), pp. 25-29 
 
 View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
3. Berg et al., 2019 
 S. Berg, D. Kutra, T. Kroeger, C.N. Straehle, B.X. Kausler, C. Haubold, M. Schiegg, J. Ales, T. Beier, M. Rudy, et al. 
 
 Ilastik: interactive machine learning for (bio)image analysis 
 
 Nat. Methods, 16 (2019), pp. 1226-1232 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
4. Bertrand et al., 2010 
 J.Y. Bertrand, N.C. Chi, B. Santoso, S. Teng, D.Y.R. Stainier, D. Traver 
 
 Haematopoietic stem cells derive directly from aortic endothelium during development 
 
 Nature, 464 (2010), pp. 108-111 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
5. Bittmann et al., 2003 
 I. Bittmann, A. Bottino, G.B. Baretton, A.L. Gerbes, R. Zachoval, H.G. Rau, U. Lohrs 
 
 The role of graft-resident Kupffer cells and lymphocytes of donor type during the time course after liver transplantation--a clinico-pathological study 
 
 Virchows Arch, 443 (2003), pp. 541-548 
 
 View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
6. Bleriot et al., 2021 
 C. Bleriot, E. Barreby, G. Dunsmore, R. Ballaire, S. Chakarov, X. Ficht, G.D. Simone, F. Andreata, V. Fumagalli, W. Guo, et al. 
 
 A subset of Kupffer cells regulates metabolism through the expression of CD36 
 
 Immunity, 54 (2021), pp. 2101-2116 
 
 e6 
 
 View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
7. Bonnardel et al., 2019 
 J. Bonnardel, W. T'Jonck, D. Gaublomme, R. Browaeys, C.L. Scott, L. Martens, B. Vanneste, S.D. Prijck, S.A. Nedospasov, A. Kremer, et al. 
 
 Stellate cells, hepatocytes, and endothelial cells imprint the Kupffer cell identity on monocytes colonizing the liver macrophage niche 
 
 Immunity, 51 (2019), pp. 638-654 
 
 e9 
 
 View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
8. Browaeys et al., 2019 
 R. Browaeys, W. Saelens, Y. Saeys 
 
 NicheNet: modeling intercellular communication by linking ligands to target genes 
 
 Nat. Methods, 17 (2019), pp. 159-162 
 
 Google Scholar[] 
9. Chalasani et al., 2008 
 N. Chalasani, L. Wilson, D.E. Kleiner, O.W. Cummings, E.M. Brunt, A. Unalp, NASH Clinical Research Network 
 
 Relationship of steatosis grade and zonal location to histological features of steatohepatitis in adult patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
 
 J. Hepatol., 48 (2008), pp. 829-834 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
10. Daemen et al., 2021 
 S. Daemen, A. Gainullina, G. Kalugotla, L. He, M.M. Chan, J.W. Beals, K.H. Liss, S. Klein, A.E. Feldstein, B.N. Finck, et al. 
 
 Dynamic shifts in the composition of resident and recruited macrophages influence tissue remodeling in NASH 
 
 Cell Rep, 34 (2021), p. 108626 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
11. Desroches-Castan et al., 2021 
 A. Desroches-Castan, E. Tillet, C. Bouvard, S. Bailly 
 
 BMP9 and BMP10: two close vascular quiescence partners that stand out 
 
 Dev. Dyn. (2021), pp. 1-20 
 
 Google Scholar[] 
12. Dobie et al., 2019 
 R. Dobie, J.R. Wilson-Kanamori, B.E.P. Henderson, J.R. Smith, K.P. Matchett, J.R. Portman, K. Wallenborg, S. Picelli, A. Zagorska, S.V. Pendem, et al. 
 
 Single-cell transcriptomics uncovers zonation of function in the mesenchyme during liver fibrosis 
 
 Cell Rep, 29 (2019), pp. 1832-1847.e8 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
13. Eckert et al., 2015 
 C. Eckert, N. Klein, M. Kornek, V. Lukacs-Kornek 
 
 The complex myeloid network of the liver with diverse functional capacity at steady state and in inflammation 
 
 Front. Immunol., 6 (2015), p. 179 
 
 View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
14. Ellett et al., 2011 
 F. Ellett, L. Pase, J.W. Hayman, A. Andrianopoulos, G.J. Lieschke 
 
 mpeg1 promoter transgenes direct macrophage-lineage expression in zebrafish 
 
 Blood, 117 (2011), pp. e49-e56 
 
 []View PDFView articleCrossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
15. Frankish et al., 2019 
 A. Frankish, M. Diekhans, A.-M. Ferreira, R. Johnson, I. Jungreis, J. Loveland, J.M. Mudge, C. Sisu, J. Wright, J. Armstrong, et al. 
 
 GENCODE reference annotation for the human and mouse genomes 
 
 Nucleic Acids Res, 47 (2019), pp. D766-D773 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
16. Gans and Wolinsky, 2008 
 J.D. Gans, M. Wolinsky 
 
 Improved assay-dependent searching of nucleic acid sequence databases 
 
 Nucleic Acids Res, 36 (2008), p. e74 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
17. Gayoso et al., 2021 
 A. Gayoso, Z. Steier, R. Lopez, J. Regier, K.L. Nazor, A. Streets, N. Yosef 
 
 Joint probabilistic modeling of single-cell multi-omic data with TotalVI 
 
 Nat. Methods, 18 (2021), pp. 272-282 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
18. Gola et al., 2021 
 A. Gola, M.G. Dorrington, E. Speranza, C. Sala, R.M. Shih, A.J. Radtke, H.S. Wong, A.P. Baptista, J.M. Hernandez, G. Castellani, et al. 
 
 Commensal-driven immune zonation of the liver promotes host defence 
 
 Nature, 589 (2021), pp. 131-136 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
19. Goumans et al., 2003 
 M.-J. Goumans, G. Valdimarsdottir, S. Itoh, F. Lebrin, J. Larsson, C. Mummery, S. Karlsson, P.T. Dijke 
 
 Activin receptor-like kinase (ALK)1 is an antagonistic mediator of lateral TGFb/ALK5 signaling 
 
 Mol. Cell, 12 (2003), pp. 817-828 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
20. Gu et al., 2014 
 Z. Gu, L. Gu, R. Eils, M. Schlesner, B. Brors 
 
 circlize implements and enhances circular visualization in R 
 
 Bioinformatics, 30 (2014), pp. 2811-2812 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
21. Guilliams and Scott, 2017 
 M. Guilliams, C.L. Scott 
 
 Does niche competition determine the origin of tissue-resident macrophages? 
 
 Nat. Rev. Immunol., 17 (2017), p. 415 
 
 Google Scholar[] 
22. Guilliams et al., 2020 
 M. Guilliams, G.R. Thierry, J. Bonnardel, M. Bajenoff 
 
 Establishment and maintenance of the macrophage niche 
 
 Immunity, 52 (2020), pp. 434-451 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
23. Haas et al., 2019 
 J.T. Haas, L. Vonghia, D.A. Mogilenko, A. Verrijken, O. Molendi-Coste, S. Fleury, A. Deprince, A. Nikitin, E. Woitrain, L. Ducrocq-Geoffroy, et al. 
 
 Transcriptional network analysis implicates altered hepatic immune function in NASH development and resolution 
 
 Nat. Metab., 1 (2019), pp. 604-614 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
24. Habib et al., 2016 
 N. Habib, Y. Li, M. Heidenreich, L. Swiech, I. Avraham-Davidi, J.J. Trombetta, C. Hession, F. Zhang, A. Regev 
 
 Div-Seq: single-nucleus RNA-Seq reveals dynamics of rare adult newborn neurons 
 
 Science, 353 (2016), pp. 925-928 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
25. Halpern et al., 2017 
 K.B. Halpern, R. Shenhav, O. Matcovitch-Natan, B. Toth, D. Lemze, M. Golan, E.E. Massasa, S. Baydatch, S. Landen, A.E. Moor, et al. 
 
 Single-cell spatial reconstruction reveals global division of labour in the mammalian liver 
 
 Nature, 542 (2017), pp. 352-356 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
26. Jaitin et al., 2019 
 D.A. Jaitin, L. Adlung, C.A. Thaiss, A. Weiner, B. Li, H. Descamps, P. Lundgren, C. Bleriot, Z. Liu, A. Deczkowska, et al. 
 
 Lipid-associated macrophages control metabolic homeostasis in a Trem2-dependent manner 
 
 Cell, 178 (2019), pp. 686-698.e14 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
27. Jin et al., 2021 
 H. Jin, K. Liu, J. Tang, X. Huang, H. Wang, Q. Zhang, H. Zhu, Y. Li, W. Pu, H. Zhao, et al. 
 
 Genetic fate-mapping reveals surface accumulation but not deep organ invasion of pleural and peritoneal cavity macrophages following injury 
 
 Nat. Commun., 12 (2021), p. 2863 
 
 View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
28. Johnson and Ruffell, 2009 
 P. Johnson, B. Ruffell 
 
 CD44 and its role in inflammation and inflammatory diseases 
 
 Inflamm. Allergy Drug Targets, 8 (2009), pp. 208-220 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
29. Keren-Shaul et al., 2017 
 H. Keren-Shaul, A. Spinrad, A. Weiner, O. Matcovitch-Natan, R. Dvir-Szternfeld, T.K. Ulland, E. David, K. Baruch, D. Lara-Astaiso, B. Toth, et al. 
 
 A unique microglia type associated with restricting development of Alzheimer's disease 
 
 Cell, 169 (2017), pp. 1276-1290.e17 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
30. Kleiner and Makhlouf, 2016 
 D.E. Kleiner, H.R. Makhlouf 
 
 Histology of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in adults and children 
 
 Clin. Liver Dis., 20 (2016), pp. 293-312 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
31. Komesli et al., 2017 
 S. Komesli, D. Vivien, P. Dutartre 
 
 Chimeric extracellular domain of type II transforming growth factor (TGF)-b receptor fused to the Fc region of human immunoglobulin as a TGF-b antagonist 
 
 Eur. J. Biochem., 254 (2017), pp. 505-513 
 
 Google Scholar[] 
32. Korsunsky et al., 2019 
 I. Korsunsky, N. Millard, J. Fan, K. Slowikowski, F. Zhang, K. Wei, Y. Baglaenko, M. Brenner, P.-R. Loh, S. Raychaudhuri 
 
 Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data with Harmony 
 
 Nat. Methods, 16 (2019), pp. 1289-1296 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
33. Kuleshov et al., 2016 
 M.V. Kuleshov, M.R. Jones, A.D. Rouillard, N.F. Fernandez, Q. Duan, Z. Wang, S. Koplev, S.L. Jenkins, K.M. Jagodnik, A. Lachmann, et al. 
 
 Enrichr: a comprehensive gene set enrichment analysis web server 2016 update 
 
 Nucleic Acids Res, 44 (2016), pp. W90-W97 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
34. Liao et al., 2020 
 M. Liao, Y. Liu, J. Yuan, Y. Wen, G. Xu, J. Zhao, L. Cheng, J. Li, X. Wang, F. Wang, et al. 
 
 Single-cell landscape of bronchoalveolar immune cells in patients with COVID-19 
 
 Nat. Med., 26 (2020), pp. 842-844 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
35. Liao et al., 2019 
 Y. Liao, J. Wang, E.J. Jaehnig, Z. Shi, B. Zhang 
 
 WebGestalt 2019: gene set analysis toolkit with revamped UIs and APIs 
 
 Nucleic Acids Res, 47 (2019), pp. W199-W205 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
36. Lindeboom et al., 2021 
 R.G.H. Lindeboom, A. Regev, S.A. Teichmann 
 
 Towards a human cell atlas: taking notes from the past 
 
 Trends Genet, 37 (2021), pp. 625-630 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
37. Lopez et al., 2018 
 R. Lopez, J. Regier, M.B. Cole, M.I. Jordan, N. Yosef 
 
 Deep generative modeling for single-cell transcriptomics 
 
 Nat. Methods, 15 (2018), pp. 1053-1058 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
38. Lun et al., 2016 
 A.T.L. Lun, D.J. McCarthy, J.C. Marioni 
 
 A step-by-step workflow for low-level analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data with Bioconductor 
 
 F1000Res, 5 (2016), p. 2122 
 
 Google Scholar[] 
39. Marcais and Kingsford, 2011 
 G. Marcais, C. Kingsford 
 
 A fast, lock-free approach for efficient parallel counting of occurrences of k-mers 
 
 Bioinformatics, 27 (2011), pp. 764-770 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
40. McCarthy et al., 2017 
 D.J. McCarthy, K.R. Campbell, A.T.L. Lun, Q.F. Wills 
 
 Scater: pre-processing, quality control, normalization and visualization of single-cell RNA-seq data in R 
 
 Bioinformatics, 33 (2017), pp. 1179-1186 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
41. Meerschaert and Furie, 1995 
 J. Meerschaert, M.B. Furie 
 
 The adhesion molecules used by monocytes for migration across endothelium include CD11a/CD18, CD11b/CD18, and VLA-4 on monocytes and ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and other ligands on endothelium 
 
 J. Immunol., 154 (1995), pp. 4099-4112 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
42. Pallett et al., 2020 
 L.J. Pallett, A.R. Burton, O.E. Amin, S. Rodriguez-Tajes, A.A. Patel, N. Zakeri, A. Jeffery-Smith, L. Swadling, N.M. Schmidt, A. Baiges, et al. 
 
 Longevity and replenishment of human liver-resident memory T cells and mononuclear phagocytes 
 
 J. Exp. Med., 217 (2020), Article e20200050 
 
 View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
43. Park et al., 2008 
 S.O. Park, Y.J. Lee, T. Seki, K.-H. Hong, N. Fliess, Z. Jiang, A. Park, X. Wu, V. Kaartinen, B.L. Roman, et al. 
 
 ALK5- and TGFBR2-independent role of ALK1 in the pathogenesis of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia type 2 
 
 Blood, 111 (2008), pp. 633-642 
 
 []View PDFView articleCrossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
44. Paszke et al., 2019 
 A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, et al. 
 
 PyTorch: an imperative style, high-performance deep learning library 
 
 arXiv (2019), Article 01703v1 
 
 arXiv:1912 
 
 Google Scholar[] 
45. Pont et al., 2019 
 F. Pont, M. Tosolini, J.J. Fournie 
 
 Single-Cell signature explorer for comprehensive visualization of single cell signatures across scRNA-seq datasets 
 
 Nucleic Acids Res, 47 (2019), p. e133 
 
 Crossref[]Google Scholar[] 
46. Ramachandran et al., 2019 
 P. Ramachandran, R. Dobie, J.R. Wilson-Kanamori, E.F. Dora, B.E.P. Henderson, N.T. Luu, J.R. Portman, K.P. Matchett, M. Brice, J.A. Marwick, et al. 
 
 Resolving the fibrotic niche of human liver cirrhosis at single-cell level 
 
 Nature, 38 (2019), pp. 2-29 
 
 View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
47. Ranganath et al., 2013 
 R. Ranganath, S. Gerrish, D.M. Blei 
 
 Black box variational inference 
 
 arXiv (2013) 
 
 arXiv:1401.0118v1 
 
 Google Scholar[] 
48. Remmerie et al., 2020 
 A. Remmerie, L. Martens, T. Thone, A. Castoldi, R. Seurinck, B. Pavie, J. Roels, B. Vanneste, S.D. Prijck, M. Vanhockerhout, et al. 
 
 Osteopontin expression identifies a subset of recruited macrophages distinct from Kupffer cells in the fatty liver 
 
 Immunity, 53 (2020), pp. 641-657.e14 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
49. Rizzo et al., 2020 
 G. Rizzo, E. Vafadarnejad, P. Arampatzi, J.-S. Silvestre, A. Zernecke, A.-E. Saliba, C. Cochain 
 
 Single-cell transcriptomic profiling maps monocyte/macrophage transitions after myocardial infarction in mice 
 
 bioRxiv, bioRxiv (2020) 
 
 2020.04.14.040451 
 
 Google Scholar[] 
50. Rodriguez et al., 2018 
 J.M. Rodriguez, J. Rodriguez-Rivas, T. Di Domenico, J. Vazquez, A. Valencia, M.L. Tress 
 
 APPRIS 2017: principal isoforms for multiple gene sets 
 
 Nucleic Acids Res, 46 (2018), pp. D213-D217 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
51. Sakai et al., 2019 
 M. Sakai, T.D. Troutman, J.S. Seidman, Z. Ouyang, N.J. Spann, Y. Abe, K.M. Ego, C.M. Bruni, Z. Deng, J.C.M. Schlachetzki, et al. 
 
 Liver-derived signals sequentially reprogram myeloid enhancers to initiate and maintain Kupffer cell identity 
 
 Immunity, 51 (2019), pp. 655-670.e8 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
52. Schneider et al., 2012 
 C.A. Schneider, W.S. Rasband, K.W. Eliceiri 
 
 NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis 
 
 Nat. Methods, 9 (2012), pp. 671-675 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
53. Scott et al., 2018 
 C.L. Scott, W. T'Jonck, L. Martens, H. Todorov, D. Sichien, B. Soen, J. Bonnardel, S.D. De Prijck, N. Vandamme, R. Cannoodt, et al. 
 
 The transcription factor ZEB2 is required to maintain the tissue-specific identities of macrophages 
 
 Immunity, 49 (2018), pp. 312-325.e5 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
54. Scott et al., 2016 
 C.L. Scott, F. Zheng, P. De Baetselier, L. Martens, Y. Saeys, S. De Prijck, S. Lippens, C. Abels, S. Schoonooghe, G. Raes, et al. 
 
 Bone marrow-derived monocytes give rise to self-renewing and fully differentiated Kupffer cells 
 
 Nat. Commun., 7 (2016), p. 10321 
 
 View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
55. Sharma et al., 2020 
 A. Sharma, J.J.W. Seow, C.-A. Dutertre, R. Pai, C. Bleriot, A. Mishra, R.M.M. Wong, G.S.N. Singh, S. Sudhagar, S. Khalilnezhad, et al. 
 
 Onco-fetal reprogramming of endothelial cells drives immunosuppressive macrophages in hepatocellular carcinoma 
 
 Cell, 183 (2020), pp. 377-394.e21 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
56. Sierro et al., 2017 
 F. Sierro, M. Evrard, S. Rizzetto, M. Melino, A.J. Mitchell, M. Florido, L. Beattie, S.B. Walters, S.S. Tay, B. Lu, et al. 
 
 A liver capsular network of monocyte-derived macrophages restricts hepatic dissemination of intraperitoneal bacteria by neutrophil recruitment 
 
 Immunity, 47 (2017), pp. 374-388.e6 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
57. Simone et al., 2021 
 G.D. Simone, F. Andreata, C. Bleriot, V. Fumagalli, C. Laura, J.M. Garcia-Manteiga, P.D. Lucia, S. Gilotto, X. Ficht, F.F.D. Ponti, et al. 
 
 Identification of a Kupffer cell subset capable of reverting the T cell dysfunction induced by hepatocellular priming 
 
 Immunity, 54 (2021), pp. 2089-2100.e8 
 
 Google Scholar[] 
58. Stoeckius et al., 2017 
 M. Stoeckius, C. Hafemeister, W. Stephenson, B. Houck-Loomis, P.K. Chattopadhyay, H. Swerdlow, R. Satija, P. Smibert 
 
 Simultaneous epitope and transcriptome measurement in single cells 
 
 Nat. Methods, 14 (2017), pp. 865-868 
 
 Crossref[]View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
59. Stuart et al., 2019 
 T. Stuart, A. Butler, P. Hoffman, C. Hafemeister, E. Papalexi, W.M. Mauck, Y. Hao, M. Stoeckius, P. Smibert, R. Satija 
 
 Comprehensive integration of single-cell data 
 
 Cell, 177 (2019), pp. 1888-1902.e21 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
60. Wickham, 2016 
 H. Wickham 
 
 ggplot2, Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis 
 
 (Second Edition), Springer (2016) 
 
 Google Scholar[] 
61. Wolf et al., 2018 
 F.A. Wolf, P. Angerer, F.J. Theis 
 
 SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene expression data analysis 
 
 Genome Biol, 19 (2018), p. 15 
 
 View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
62. Yates et al., 2020 
 A.D. Yates, P. Achuthan, W. Akanni, J. Allen, J. Allen, J. Alvarez-Jarreta, M.R. Amode, I.M. Armean, A.G. Azov, R. Bennett, et al. 
 
 Ensembl 2020 
 
 Nucleic Acids Res, 48 (2020), pp. D682-D688 
 
 View in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
63. Zhou et al., 2018 
 X. Zhou, R.A. Franklin, M. Adler, J.B. Jacox, W. Bailis, J.A. Shyer, R.A. Flavell, A. Mayo, U. Alon, R. Medzhitov 
 
 Circuit design features of a stable two-cell system 
 
 Cell, 172 (2018), pp. 744-757.e17 
 
 []View PDFView articleView in Scopus[]Google Scholar[] 
 
Cited by (369) 
 
- Macrophages in health and disease 
 
 2022, Cell 
 
 Show abstract[] 
 
 The heterogeneity of tissue macrophages, in health and in disease, has become increasingly transparent over the last decade. But with the plethora of data comes a natural need for organization and the design of a conceptual framework for how we can better understand the origins and functions of different macrophages. We propose that the ontogeny of a macrophage--beyond its fundamental derivation as either embryonically or bone marrow-derived, but rather inclusive of the course of its differentiation, amidst steady-state cues, disease-associated signals, and time--constitutes a critical piece of information about its contribution to homeostasis or the progression of disease. 
 
- Gut-liver axis: Pathophysiological concepts and clinical implications 
 
 2022, Cell Metabolism 
 
 Show abstract[] 
 
 Bidirectional crosstalk along the gut-liver axis controls gastrointestinal health and disease and exploits environmental and host mediators. Nutrients, microbial antigens, metabolites, and bile acids regulate metabolism and immune responses in the gut and liver, which reciprocally shape microbial community structure and function. Perturbation of such host-microbe interactions is observed in a variety of experimental liver diseases and is facilitated by an impaired intestinal barrier, which is fueling hepatic inflammation and disease progression. Clinical evidence describes perturbation of the gut-liver crosstalk in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, alcoholic liver disease, and primary sclerosing cholangitis. In liver cirrhosis, a common sequela of these diseases, the intestinal microbiota and microbial pathogen-associated molecular patterns constitute liver inflammation and clinical complications, such as hepatic encephalopathy. Understanding the intricate metabolic interplay between the gut and liver in health and disease opens an avenue for targeted therapies in the future, which is probed in controlled clinical trials. 
 
- Immune mechanisms linking metabolic injury to inflammation and fibrosis in fatty liver disease - novel insights into cellular communication circuits 
 
 2022, Journal of Hepatology 
 
 Show abstract[] 
 
 Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most prevalent chronic liver disease and is emerging as the leading cause of cirrhosis, liver transplantation and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). NAFLD is a metabolic disease that is considered the hepatic manifestation of the metabolic syndrome; however, during the evolution of NAFLD from steatosis to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), to more advanced stages of NASH with liver fibrosis, the immune system plays an integral role. Triggers for inflammation are rooted in hepatic (lipid overload, lipotoxicity, oxidative stress) and extrahepatic (gut-liver axis, adipose tissue, skeletal muscle) systems, resulting in unique immune-mediated pathomechanisms in NAFLD. In recent years, the implementation of single-cell RNA-sequencing and high dimensional multi-omics (proteogenomics, lipidomics) and spatial transcriptomics have tremendously advanced our understanding of the complex heterogeneity of various liver immune cell subsets in health and disease. In NAFLD, several emerging inflammatory mechanisms have been uncovered, including profound macrophage heterogeneity, auto-aggressive T cells, the role of unconventional T cells and platelet-immune cell interactions, potentially yielding novel therapeutics. In this review, we will highlight the recent discoveries related to inflammation in NAFLD, discuss the role of immune cell subsets during the different stages of the disease (including disease regression) and integrate the multiple systems driving inflammation. We propose a refined concept by which the immune system contributes to all stages of NAFLD and discuss open scientific questions arising from this paradigm shift that need to be unravelled in the coming years. Finally, we discuss novel therapeutic approaches to target the multiple triggers of inflammation, including combination therapy via nuclear receptors (FXR agonists, PPAR agonists). 
 
- Biology of lung macrophages in health and disease 
 
 2022, Immunity 
 
 Show abstract[] 
 
 Tissue-resident alveolar and interstitial macrophages and recruited macrophages are critical players in innate immunity and maintenance of lung homeostasis. Until recently, assessing the differential functional contributions of tissue-resident versus recruited macrophages has been challenging because they share overlapping cell surface markers, making it difficult to separate them using conventional methods. This review describes how scRNA-seq and spatial transcriptomics can separate these subpopulations and help unravel the complexity of macrophage biology in homeostasis and disease. First, we provide a guide to identifying and distinguishing lung macrophages from other mononuclear phagocytes in humans and mice. Second, we outline emerging concepts related to the development and function of the various lung macrophages in the alveolar, perivascular, and interstitial niches. Finally, we describe how different tissue states profoundly alter their functions, including acute and chronic lung disease, cancer, and aging. 
 
- Methods and applications for single-cell and spatial multi-omics[] 
 
 2023, Nature Reviews Genetics 
 
- Liver tumour immune microenvironment subtypes and neutrophil heterogeneity[] 
 
 2022, Nature 
 
[]View all citing articles on Scopus[] 
 
23 
 
 These authors contributed equally 
 
24 
 
 These authors contributed equally 
 
25 
 
 Lead contact 
 
(c) 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
