Basic Research

Single-Cell Transcriptomic Map of the Human and Mouse Bladders

Yu, Zhenyuan; Liao, Jinling; Chen, Yang; Zou, Chunlin; Zhang, Haiying;
Cheng, Jiwen; Liu, Deyun; Li, Tianyu; Zhang, Qingyun; Li, Jiaping; Yang,
Xiaobo; Ye, Yu; Huang, Zhiguang; Long, Xinyang; Yang, Rirong; Mo,
Zengnan

Author Information

¹ Institute of Urology and Nephrology,

Departments of ³ Urology and

⁹ Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, China;

² Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine,

¹³ Department of Immunology, School of Preclinical Medicine, Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, China;

⁴ Guangxi Collaborative Innovation Center for Genomic and Personalized
Medicine, Nanning, China;

⁵ Guangxi Key Laboratory for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi
Key Laboratory of Colleges and Universities, Nanning, China;

⁶ Key Laboratory of Longevity and Ageing-related Diseases, Ministry of
Education, Nanning, China;

⁷ Center for Translational Medicine, Guangxi Medical University,
Nanning, China;

⁸ Department of Urology, Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, China;

¹⁰ Guangxi Key Laboratory of Precision Medicine in
Cardio-cerebrovascular Diseases Control and Prevention, Nanning, China;

¹¹ Guangxi Clinical Research Center for Cardio-cerebrovascular Diseases,
Nanning, China; and

¹² Scientific Research Department, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, China

Z.Y., J. Liao., and Y.C. contributed equally to this work.

Correspondence: Prof. Zengnan Mo or Dr. Rirong Yang, Center for Genomic
and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi Medical University, Shuangyong Road
22, Nanning, Guangxi, China, 530021. E-mail: zengnanmo@hotmail.com or
520yrr@163.com

JASN 30(11):p 2159-2176, November 2019. | DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2019040335

-    Infographic
-   [SDC]
-   [SDC]
-   [SDC]
-   [SDC]
-   [SDC]
-   [SDC]
-   [SDC]

Metrics

Abstract

Significance Statement

Previous studies of bladder cell classification mostly relied on the
cell’s morphology, location, electrophysiology, and function. However,
it is difficult to classify bladder cells accurately and comprehensively
using these methods. The authors created a single-cell transcriptomic
map of human bladder cells using single-cell RNA sequencing. They also
created a more detailed single-cell sequencing RNA map of the mouse
bladder than what was previously available. Using these tools, the
authors compare the similarities and differences between human and mouse
bladder cells and found many cell types that are highly similar across
the two. Additionally, the authors discovered two new types of human
bladder cells. One may play a role in allergic reactions and nerve
conduction, whereas the other may play a role in bladder emptying. The
results may assist scientists studying the relationship between bladder
cell types and diseases.

Background

Having a comprehensive map of the cellular anatomy of the normal human
bladder is vital to understanding the cellular origins of benign bladder
disease and bladder cancer.

Methods

We used single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of 12,423 cells from
healthy human bladder tissue samples taken from patients with bladder
cancer and 12,884 cells from mouse bladders to classify bladder cell
types and their underlying functions.

Results

We created a single-cell transcriptomic map of human and mouse bladders,
including 16 clusters of human bladder cells and 15 clusters of mouse
bladder cells. The homology and heterogeneity of human and mouse bladder
cell types were compared and both conservative and heterogeneous aspects
of human and mouse bladder evolution were identified. We also discovered
two novel types of human bladder cells. One type is ADRA2A ⁺ and HRH2 ⁺
interstitial cells which may be associated with nerve conduction and
allergic reactions. The other type is TNNT1 ⁺ epithelial cells that may
be involved with bladder emptying. We verify these TNNT1 ⁺ epithelial
cells also occur in rat and mouse bladders.

Conclusions

This transcriptomic map provides a resource for studying bladder cell
types, specific cell markers, signaling receptors, and genes that will
help us to learn more about the relationship between bladder cell types
and diseases.

Visual Abstract

[Abstract]

Export

The urinary bladder wall is organized into mucosal, muscular, serosal,
and adventitial layers to sustain continuous storage and elimination
phases. ^(¹) In normal conditions, the bladder cells can coordinate with
one another. However, when bladder cells are dysfunctional, bladder
diseases will occur. Bladder cancer is the most common malignancy of the
urinary system and is the second most common cause of death among
genitourinary tumors. ^(²) Urinary tract infections are among the most
common bacterial infections acquired in the community and in hospitals.
^(³) Each year, approximately 10% of women report having had a urinary
tract infection and >50% of all women have at least one such infection
in their lifetime. ^(⁴) Some benign bladder diseases, such as lower
urinary tract symptoms, overactive bladder (OAB), and interstitial
cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS), are highly prevalent conditions
worldwide. ^(⁵) ^(,) ^(⁶) Patients suffer from substantial economic and
human burden, ^(⁵) ^(,) ^(⁶) but the pathogenesis of these diseases
remains unclear.

Sanders et al. ^(⁷) suggested interstitial cell (IC) as a morphologic
term indicating a variety of cells with varying origins and phenotypes
that occupy spaces within the interstitium between the cells and is the
most prominent in defining a given tissue. In bladder smooth muscle
tissues, fibroblasts, myofibroblasts, endothelial cells, and ICs of
Cajal meet the definition above. ^(⁷) McCloskey and Gurney ^(⁸)
discovered the bladder ICs of Cajal and suggested these cells can act as
pacemakers or intermediaries in the transmission of nerve signals to
smooth muscle cells. The ICs in detrusor muscles are controversial. In a
previous study, researchers could not find c-Kit ⁺ ICs in bladder
muscles but discovered a new class of ICs, the platelet-derived growth
factor receptor- α (PDGFRA) cells in mouse urinary bladder. ^(⁹)
However, to our knowledge, previous studies lacked an integrated
perspective for studying bladder cells. The number of existing bladder
cell subtypes, their distinctive properties, and the homology and
heterogeneity of human and mouse are unclear. Although Han et al . ^(¹⁰)
mapped the Mouse Cell Atlas (MCA) by microwell sequencing which
analyzed >400,000 single cells covering all major mouse organs,
including 3143 mouse bladder cells, the number and cell types of mouse
bladder cells are scarce, and the high-throughput single-cell RNA
sequencing (scRNA-seq) of human bladder cells has not been reported thus
far.

We aim to understand the unsupervised classification and function of
both human and mouse bladder cells precisely. With the development of
next-generation sequencing, high-throughput single-cell analysis, ^(¹¹)
and The Human Cell Atlas, ^(¹²) we used scRNA-seq for the experimental
technique. Single-cell transcriptome analysis should identify the
heterogeneity of human bladder cells and will provide information to
understand how the different cell types are associated with bladder
diseases.

Methods

Human Bladder Tissue Procurement and Isolation

Fresh human bladder samples ( Supplemental Table 1 ) were collected at
The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University and
Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Guangxi Medical University. We received
approval of Institution Review Board from The First Affiliated Hospital
of Guangxi Medical University, and received signed informed consent from
all patients. Two out of the three samples were obtained from patients
undergoing radical cystectomy, and the remaining sample was from a
patient undergoing partial cystectomy. None of the three patients had
received radiation, chemotherapy, or intracystic treatments before
surgery. It took about 30 minutes from cutting off blood supply to
remove the sample from the body. To ensure bladder tissues removed from
the three participants (P1, P2, P3) were far enough away from the tumor,
the bladder tissues for P2 and P3 were obtained from the bladder body
and those for P1 were obtained from the bladder dome. Normal bladder
tissue was obtained at least 2 cm away from the tumor tissue (
Supplemental Figure 1A ). The immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence (IF) samples were obtained from patients undergoing
radical cystectomy ( Supplemental Table 2 ).

First, we transferred fresh tissue from the operating room to the
laboratory in cold HBSS (311-512-CL; WISENT) with 1%
penicillin-streptomycin (15240062; Gibco), and the entire transport
process was ≤20 minutes. After washing with 4°C Dulbecco’s
phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS; 311-425-CL; WISENT), full-thickness
bladder tissues with a surface diameter of 1 cm were cut using surgical
scissors ( Supplemental Figure 1A ). After adding DPBS to the conical
tube, the bladder fragment was centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 minutes at
4°C, with one repeat. After discarding supernatant, 10 ml of collagenase
type 1 (1.5 mg/ml; 17100017; Gibco) with DNase I (0.2 mg/ml;
10104159001; Roche) perfusion was carried out for 30 minutes at 37°C and
then centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 minutes at 4°C. After discarding the
supernatant, we used 5 ml of TrypLE Express Enzyme (1×; 12605010;
Gibco,) to further digest the sticky clumps of cells for 5 minutes at
37°C. Digestion was then terminated by 10 ml DMEM (319-006-CL; WISENT)
with 10% FBS (10099141; Gibco,). Following treatment with collagenase
type 1 and TrypLE Express Enzyme, the dissociated single cells were
collected ( Supplemental Figure 1B ). Next, we removed red blood cells
using 5 ml of 1× RBC Lysis Buffer (10× diluted to 1×; B250015;
BioLegend) for 5 minutes and centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 minutes at
4°C. After discarding the supernatant, the cells were resuspended in 4°C
DPBS. Finally, the cells were passed through a 40- μ m cell strainer. We
obtained the single-cell suspension ( Supplemental Figure 1C ) and
detected live cells using a hemocytometer with trypan blue (0.4%;
420301; Gibco). In total, it took about 3 hours from tissue ischemia to
the successful preparation of single-cell suspension in our laboratory.

Mouse and Rat Bladder Tissue Procurement and Isolation

All mouse and rat procedures were approved by the Guangxi Medical
University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Wild-type
C57BL/6 mice were ordered from Hunan SJA Laboratory Animal Co., Ltd.,
and Guangxi Medical University Laboratory Animal Centre. Sprague Dawley
rats were ordered from Guangxi Medical University Laboratory Animal
Centre. All mice and rats were housed in Guangxi Medical University
Laboratory Animal Centre in a specific-pathogen-free facility with
individually ventilated cages. The room has controlled temperature
(20°C–22°C), humidity (30%–70%) and light (12-hour light/dark cycle).
The bladder tissues of rats were used for immunohistochemistry and
Western blot. Mice ( Supplemental Table 3 ) were randomly assigned after
matching for sex, and bladder tissues were harvested from 7- to
12-week-old male ( n =5) or female mice ( n =5). Given the genetic
stability of C57BL/6 mice, we obtained single-cell suspensions from the
entire bladders of 10 C57BL/6 mice mixed together. We then took twice
the mice bladder cells from the same single-cell suspension and
performed two 10× Genomics reactions, respectively. At the same time, we
harvested bladder tissues from other mice for immunohistochemistry and
Western blot ( Supplemental Table 4 ).

Next, we cut the tissues into fragments using surgical scissors. Bladder
fragments were stored temporarily in DPBS (311-425-CL) at 4°C. It was
centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 minutes at 4°C, and this step was repeated.
Collagenase type 1 (10 ml, 1 mg/ml; 17100017) with DNase I (0.2mg/ml;
10104159001) perfusion was carried out for 20 minutes at 37°C and then
centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 minutes at 4°C. After discarding the
supernatant, we used StemPro Accutase Cell Dissociation Reagent
(A1110501; Gibco) to digest the sticky clumps of cells for 10 minutes
and then terminated digestion with DPBS. Following collagenase and
accutase treatment, the dissociated single cells were collected. Next,
we removed red blood cells using 5 ml of 1× RBC Lysis Buffer (10×
diluted to 1×; B250015) for 5 minutes, and then centrifuged at 300 × g
for 5 minutes at 4°C. After discarding the supernatant, the cells were
resuspended in DPBS at 4°C. The cells passed through a 40- μ m cell
strainer. We obtained the single-cell suspension ( Supplemental Figure
1D ) and detected live cells using a hemocytometer with trypan blue
(0.4%; 420301). It took about 2 hours to prepare the mouse single-cell
suspension.

Sample Processing with 10× Genomics and cDNA Library Preparation

We used 10× Genomics Chromium Single Cell 3′ Reagents Kit version 2 (
https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/index/doc/user-guide-chromium-single-cell-3-reagent-kits-user-guide-v2-chemistry
) to perform the previously mentioned single-cell suspensions. Briefly,
the single-cell samples were passed through a 40- μ m cell strainer and
live cells were counted using a hemocytometer with trypan blue ( Table 1
). Subsequently, the appropriate volume of each sample was calculated to
recover 10,000 cells. Using the 10× protocol, we added the single cells,
the gel beads, and the oils to the 10× Genomics Single Cell A Chip and
ran the machine. After droplet generation, samples were transferred onto
a PCR tube and reverse transcription was performed using T100 Thermal
Cycler (Bio-Rad). After the reverse transcription, cDNA was recovered
using Recovery Agent which was provided by 10× Genomics. The cDNA was
then cleaned using a Silane DynaBead as outlined in the user guide.
Purified cDNA was amplified for ten cycles before being cleaned up using
SPRIselect beads. The samples were detected using a Qubit2.0 Fluorometer
(Invitrogen) to determine cDNA concentration. The cDNA libraries were
prepared according to the Chromium Single Cell 3′ Reagent Kits version 2
user guide.

Table 1. - Cell viability of samples before performing 10× Genomics

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Samples                                     Cell Viability (%)
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  P1                                                  95

  P2                                                  90

  P3                                                  86

  Mice                                               82.5
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

scRNA-Seq Processing and Preliminary Results

Samples were sequenced using a Hiseq Xten (Illumina, San Diego, CA) with
the following run parameters: read 1 for 150 cycles, read 2 for 150
cycles, and index for 14 cycles. Preliminary sequencing results (bcl
files) were converted to FASTQ files with CellRanger (version 2.1.1 for
P3 data, version 2.2.0 for P1 and P2 data, and version 3.0.0 for mouse
data;
https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/pipelines/latest/what-is-cell-ranger
). The FASTQ files were then aligned to the human genome reference
sequence, GRCh38, and the mouse genome reference sequence, mm10. We also
used Cell Ranger for preliminary data analysis and generated a file
containing a barcodes table, a genes table, and a gene expression
matrix. Next, we obtained an overview website containing a considerable
amount of information, such as number of cells, median number of
detected genes, sequencing saturation, and sequencing depth (
Supplemental Tables 1 and 5 ).

Using Seurat for Quality Control and Human Bladder Data Secondary Analysis

First, we installed R (version 3.5.1, https://www.r-project.org/ ) and
Seurat R package (version 2.3.4, https://satijalab.org/seurat/ ). We
used the MergeSeurat function to merge three human samples and two
reactions of mouse samples. The proportion of mitochondrial genes to all
genetic material may indicate whether a cell is in homeostasis or not.
We generally believe when a cell has a high percentage of mitochondrial
genes versus all genes, it may be under stress. Thus, according to the
median number of genes and the percentage of mitochondrial genes in the
human and mouse samples ( Supplemental Figures 2, A–C and 3, A and B ),
the cells with <200 and >4000 genes (potential cell duplets) and a
mitochondrial gene percentage of >10% were filtered out ( Supplemental
Figures 2D and 3C ). After the step above, we obtained 12,423 human
bladder and 12,884 mouse bladder cells.

After data normalization, we identified highly variable genes in the
single cells after controlling for the relationship between average
expression and dispersion. Genes were removed using the low cut-off of
0.0125 and high cut-off of 3, and the z -score cut-off of 0.5 was
applied to identify the highly variable genes, thereby resulting in 1778
genes for human data and 2568 genes for mouse data. We then used
principal-component analysis (PCA), with the variable genes as input,
and identified significant principal components based on the jackStraw
function. A total of 15 principal components were selected as
statistically significant input for t -distributed stochastic neighbor
embedding (t-SNE). We detected the distribution of t-SNE and PCA between
these samples ( Supplemental Figures 4, A–C and 5, A and B ). Both human
and mice data showed a good correlation ( Supplemental Figures 4, D–F,
and 5C ). At the same time, we also examined the distribution of PCA in
all types of cells ( Supplemental Figure 4B ). We compared the average
expression of genes between the three samples, and found a good Pearson
correlation between them ( Supplemental Figure 4, D–F ). Cells were
clustered by the FindClusters function and classified into 16 clusters
for human and 15 clusters for mouse. Next, we used the FindAllMarkers
function to find differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between each type
of cells ( Supplemental Tables 6 and 7 ). To facilitate in-depth
analysis of human ICs, we used the FindMarkers function to find DEGs
among five ICs ( Supplemental Table 8 ).

Mouse bladder data from MCA were analyzed using a similar method. MCA
data are available from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), accession
GSE108097.

Cell Cycle Analysis

Cell cycle analysis was performed using the Seurat package and we used a
previously defined core set of 43 G1/S and 54 G2/M cell cycle genes.
^(¹³) We classified cells by the maximal average expression (“cycle
score”) in these two gene sets. When the cycle scores of G1/S and G2/M
were both less than two, we considered these cells as noncycling.
Otherwise, we considered the cells as proliferative.

Reconstructing Human ICs Differentiation Trajectories using Monocle2

Cell fate decisions and pseudotime trajectories were reconstructed using
the Monocle2 R package (version 2.8.0,
http://cole-trapnell-lab.github.io/monocle-release/ ). Firstly, the five
types of ICs were performed by Seurat. These Seurat data which included
3328 ICs were imported into Monocle2. Genes that were expressed in at
least ten cells were used and only genes expressed in >5% of cells were
kept. We used thresholds on the cells local density ( ρ ) and nearest
distance ( δ ) to determine the number of clusters. We then performed
the differential gene expression analysis as before but across all cell
clusters. We used the top 1000 most significant DEGs as the set of
ordering genes and performed the dimension reduction and the trajectory
analysis. Once we established a trajectory, we used the
differentialGeneTest function to find genes that had an expression
pattern that varied according to pseudotime.

Comparison of Human and Mouse Bladder Cells at Single-Cell Resolution

We performed comparisons across species by referring to a previous
analysis method. ^(¹⁴) Briefly, after the above program (quality control
step), we obtained 12,423 human bladder cells and 12,884 mouse bladder
cells. We considered all homologous genes with identical gene names
between the human and mouse data sets. For both species, we calculated
average expression per gene ( n =12,235 genes) in each cluster. Then, we
calculate the Pearson correlation coefficient.

RNA Velocity Analysis

RNA velocity analysis was performed using the velocyto.R program (
http://velocyto.org , version 0.6). ^(¹⁵) Briefly, spliced/unspliced
reads were annotated by velocyto.py with CellRanger (version 2.2.0),
generating BAM files and accompany GTF, and then saved in .loom files.
The .loom files were then loaded to R (version 3.5.2) using the
read.loom.matrices function to generate count tables for splicing and
unsplicing reads. Next, we filtered out the cells in the bottom 0.5% of
the total unspliced transcript count. We then removed genes according to
an average spliced variant expression of <0.2 or average unspliced
variant expression of 0.05 in at least one cluster. Lastly, the
velocity-vector arrows were projected onto the t-SNE plot which was
obtained in Seurat.

Immunohistochemistry

The results from immunohistochemistry were verified in at least three
different patient samples, especially the result of TNNT1 in seven
different patient samples. Each sample was performed in at least five
slides. Human bladder tissue was cut into 5 mm × 4 mm × 3 mm blocks and
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (P1110-500; Solarbio) for 24–48 hours.
These paraffin-embedded tissues were obtained from patients undergoing
partial cystectomy ( Supplemental Table 2 ). The slides of 3- μ m
sections were cut by using a Leica Sliding Microtome (RM2235; Leica).
Tissues were then rehydrated using solutions of ethanol ranging from
100% to 70% and washed with PBS (P1010-2; Solarbio). Sodium citrate (pH
6.0, 50× diluted to 1×; catalog number C1032; Solarbio) to perform a
high-pressure repair on the slides. Tissues were blocked in goat serum
(SP-9000; ZSGB-BIO) in PBS for 15 minutes at room temperature. The
slides were incubated with anti- ADRA2A antibody (rabbit
anti-human/mouse, 1:1000, ab85570; Abcam), anti- TNNT1 antibody (rabbit
anti-human/mouse/rat, 1:500, NBP1-32748; Novus), anti- HRH2 antibody
(rabbit anti-human, 1:100, NBP1-86082; Novus), anti-cytokeratin 17
antibody (rabbit anti-human/mouse, 1:100, ab109725; Abcam),
anti-cytokeratin 15 antibody (rabbit anti-human/mouse, 1:500, ab52816;
Abcam), and PBS control prepared in blocking solution at 4°C overnight.
After washing in PBS, the tissues were incubated with secondary
antibodies (D-3004-15; Shanghai Long Island Antibody Diagnostica Inc.)
for 15 minutes at room temperature. Finally, we used DAB (ZLI-9018;
Beijing Noble Ryder Technology Co., Ltd.) for staining and hematoxylin
for nucleation.

Immunohistochemistry paraffin (IHC-P) of mouse and rat tissues was
performed by the same method. We used anti- ADRA2A antibody (rabbit
anti-mouse/human, 1:100, ab92650; Abcam), anti-cytokeratin 17 antibody
(rabbit anti-mouse/human, 1:100, ab109725), anti-cytokeratin15 antibody
(rabbit anti-mouse/human, 1:500, ab52816), and anti- TNNT1 antibody
(rabbit anti-mouse/rat/human, 1:500, NBP1-32748) as the primary
antibodies.

IF

The results of IF were verified in at least two different patient
samples. Some steps were similar to those of immunohistochemistry.
Before we performed IF, the antibody specificity was confirmed by
labeling control groups. We set six negative controls: PBS and
anti-mouse secondary antibody, PBS and anti-rabbit secondary antibody,
rabbit primary antibody ( ADRA2A ) and anti-mouse secondary antibody,
rabbit primary antibody ( HRH2 ) and anti-mouse secondary antibody,
mouse primary antibody ( VIM ) and anti-rabbit secondary antibody, and
mouse primary antibody ( PECAM1 ) and anti-rabbit secondary antibody.
The results from the controls indicated there is no unspecific reaction
between PBS and the primary and secondary antibodies used ( Supplemental
Figure 6A ). Briefly, we used the slides after high-pressure repair and
incubated them with primary antibodies. We divided the primary antibody
into the following groups: anti- ADRA2A (rabbit anti-human, 1:200,
ab85570; Abcam) and anti-vimentin antibodies (mouse anti-human, 1:1000,
ab8978; Abcam), anti- HRH2 (rabbit anti-human, 1:200, NBP1-86082; Novus)
and anti-vimentin antibodies (mouse anti-human, 1:1000, ab8978), and
anti- ADRA2A (rabbit anti-human, 1:200, ab85570) and anti- PECAM1
antibodies (mouse anti-human, 1:25, NB600-562; Novus). The slides were
incubated with the primary antibodies at 4°C overnight. After washing
with PBS, the slides were incubated with secondary antibodies, namely
Alexa Fluor 488 (goat anti-mouse IgG preadsorbed, 1:500, ab150117;
Abcam) and Alexa Fluor 594 (goat anti-rabbit IgG preadsorbed, 1:500,
ab150084; Abcam) for 1 hour. After washing with PBS, we stained the
slides with DAPI (ab104139, Abcam) for 10 minutes.

Immunoblotting

Briefly, the bladder tissues of Sprague Dawley rat (77.3 mg), C57BL/6
mouse (70 mg), and human (137 mg) were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer
(P0013B; Beyotime) containing both protease inhibitor (P1045-1;
Beyotime) and phosphatase inhibitor (P1045-2; Beyotime) on ice. After
centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 5 minutes, the supernatants were
harvested and the protein concentrations were determined using a BSA
Quantification Kit (A8020; Solarbio). Protein samples (20–50 μ g) from
supernatants were separated on SDS-PAGE and transferred onto
polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (BS-PVDF-22; Biosharp). The membrane
was blocked for 2 hours with blocking buffer containing 5% nonfat milk
(wt/vol), 1× Tris-buffered saline/Tween 20 (TBST; 20× TBS [T1080;
Solarbio] was diluted with double-distilled water and Tween 20 [C-0086;
Bioss] was added). After three washings with TBST, membranes were
incubated at 4°C overnight with primary antibodies, respectively. The
primary antibodies were anti- ADRA2A (rabbit anti-human/mouse/rat,
1:1000, ab85570) and anti–glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(anti- GAPDH ; rabbit anti-human/mouse/rat, catalog number 2118, 1:1000;
CST). The membranes were washed three times with TBST, and incubated
with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibody (goat
anti-rabbit, 1:1000, A0208; Beyotime) at room temperature for 1 hour,
and then washed three times again. Immunoreactivity using the ECL Kit
for Western blot (P0018S; Beyotime) was visualized by an imager
(ImageQuant LAS 500; GE Healthcare). GAPDH was used as a loading
control. The presented results are from at least three repetitions of
Western blot.

Data Access

The raw data and processed data in this article can be accessed in the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (GEO) database
(GSE129845). The average expression of every gene in every cell cluster
of human and mouse bladder ( Supplemental Tables 9 and 10 ) can be
accessed in Figshare ( https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.8942663.v1 ),
together with DEGs of every cell cluster in human or mouse bladder (
Supplemental Tables 6 and 7 ).

Results

scRNA-Seq Profiling and Unbiased Clustering of Human Urinary Bladder Cells

Bladder specimens from two males and one female organ donors aged 35–48
( Supplemental Table 1 ) were collected fresh, dissected, and digested
into single cells (Methods). We then performed scRNA-seq with a
high-throughput, droplet-mediated scRNA-seq platform (10× Genomics
Chromium; ^(¹⁶) Figure 1A and Methods). A total of 13,495 cells were
isolated and sequenced from the three samples with a median of 1356–2336
genes detected per cell ( Supplemental Table 1 ). Under stringent
quality controls by Seurat ^(¹⁷) ( https://satijalab.org/seurat/ ),
12,423 high-quality cells were further analyzed. Clustering analysis
identified 16 distinct cell clusters consisting of cells in the range of
66–2337 cells per cluster ( Figure 1B , Supplemental Figure 2E ).
According to the marker genes ( Table 2 ) of each type of cells, we
classified cells into cluster 1–16, thereby corresponding to basal cells
1, basal cells 2, fibroblast 1, intermediate cells 1, intermediate cells
2, smooth muscle cells, fibroblast 2, myofibroblast, fibroblast 3,
monocytes, endothelial cells, TNNT1 ⁺ epithelial cells, T cells,
umbrella cells, ADRA2A ⁺ ICs, and B cells, respectively ( Figure 1C ).

[fig1]

Figure 1.:

High-throughput 10× scRNA-seq reveals the cell populations of human
bladder. (A) Overview of the scRNA-seq approach using human and mouse
bladder tissue samples that were processed into a single-cell
suspension, and scRNA-seq analysis using the 10× platform. (B) t-SNE
plot representation of 12,423 urinary bladder cells from three human
samples and clusters are colored and distinctively labeled. (C) Heat map
showing the marker genes of each cluster, highlighting the selected
marker genes for each cluster from humans. (D) t-SNE plot representation
of 12,884 urinary bladder cells from ten mice and clusters are colored
and distinctively labeled. (E) Heat map showing the marker genes of each
cluster, highlighting the selected marker genes for each cluster from
mouse.

Table 2. - Genes used as markers of different cell types and the
reference that justified their use

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Gene           Marker                                  Reference
  -------------- -------------------------------- ------------------------
  KRT18          Epithelial cell                           ^(³⁷)

  KRT19          Epithelial cell                           ^(³⁷)

  KRT5           Basal cell                                ^(³⁷)

  KRT17          Basal cell                                ^(³⁷)

  KRT13          Intermediate cell, basal cell             ^(³⁷)

  KRT20          Umbrella cell                             ^(³⁷)

  UPK1A          Umbrella cell ^(high) ,                 ^(³⁷ , ³⁸)
                 intermediate cell ^(low) ^(a)    

  UPK1B          Umbrella cell ^(high) ,                 ^(³⁷ , ³⁸)
                 intermediate cell ^(low) ^(a)    

  UPK3B          Umbrella cell ^(high) ,                 ^(³⁷ , ³⁸)
                 intermediate cell ^(low) ^(a)    

  UPK3A          Umbrella cell                           ^(³⁷ , ³⁸)

  UPK2           Umbrella cell                           ^(³⁷ , ³⁸)

  VIM            Interstitial cell                       ^(⁷ , ¹⁸)

  S100A4         Fibroblast                              ^(¹⁹ , ²⁰)

  COL3A1         Fibroblast                                ^(²¹)

  COL1A1         Fibroblast                              ^(²⁰ , ²¹)

  COL1A2         Fibroblast                              ^(²⁰ , ²¹)

  ACTA2          Myofibroblast                             ^(²²)

  TAGLN          Smooth muscle cell                      ^(³⁹ , ⁴⁰)

  DES            Smooth muscle cell                        ^(⁴⁰)

  CNN1           Smooth muscle cell                        ^(⁴⁰)

  ACTG2          Smooth muscle cell                        ^(⁴¹)

  TPM2           Smooth muscle cell                        ^(⁴²)

  SELE           Endothelial cell                          ^(⁴³)

  PECAM1         Endothelial cell                        ^(⁴³ , ⁴⁴)

  VCAM1          Endothelial cell                        ^(⁴³ , ⁴⁴)

  CDH5           Endothelial cell                          ^(⁴⁵)

  LYZ            Monocyte                                  ^(⁴⁶)

  MS4A7          Monocyte                                  ^(⁴⁶)

  CD14           Monocyte                                ^(⁴⁶ , ⁴⁷)

  CD209          Dendritic cell                          ^(⁴⁸ , ⁴⁹)

  CD3D           T cell                                  ^(⁴⁶ , ⁵⁰)

  CD3E           T cell                                  ^(⁴⁶ , ⁵⁰)

  MZB1           B cell                                    ^(⁵¹)

  CD79A          B cell                              ^(⁴⁶ , ^(52–54) –)

  GPM6A          Neuron                                  ^(⁵⁵ , ⁵⁶)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

^(a) The expression of this gene was higher in umbrella cells than in
intermediate cells.

Some differences in cell homogeneity were found between different
populations. In the top five genes of each cluster, only the smooth
muscle cells (cluster 6) maintained high homogeneity, in which each cell
approximately expressed the top five genes ( Supplemental Figure 7, A
and B ). However, other clusters did not have this characteristic.

Interestingly, we defined each cluster cell by using the reported marker
genes ( Table 2 ), some new gene markers can be found in some clusters.
For example, in fibroblast 1 (cluster 3), PLA2G2A and IGFBP6 were highly
expressed compared with those of other clusters. ( Supplemental Figure
7A ). PIGR and LCN2 were also highly expressed in umbrella cells
(cluster 14, Supplemental Figure 7A ).

Five Types of ICs, Especially a Novel IC in Human Bladder, Revealed by scRNA-Seq

Next, we focused on ICs ( Figure 2A ). In previous studies, VIM , which
encodes vimentin, was considered the specific gene marker for ICs. ^(⁷)
^(,) ^(¹⁸) These VIM -positive cells can be classified into five
populations ( Figure 2B ), excluding immune cells. Depending on the
fibroblast marker genes S100A4 , ^(¹⁹) COL1A1 , ^(²⁰) ^(,) ^(²¹) and
COL3A1 , ^(²¹) fibroblasts can be classified into three subpopulations,
namely fibroblast 1, fibroblast 2, and fibroblast 3 ( Figure 2B ).
Fibroblast 3 expresses VIM , COL1A1 , and COL3A1 but did not express
S100A4. We also defined the myofibroblast by coexpressing ACTA2 ^(²²)
and VIM but not expressing S100A4 ( Figure 2B ). However, we discovered
a novel type of ICs which coexpressed ACTA2 and S100A4 ( Figure 2B ).
Unlike other ICs, these cells were highly expressed in ADRA2A and HRH2 ,
as well in AVPR1A . ( Figure 2B ).

[fig2]

Figure 2.:

ICs can be classified into multiple cell types by scRNA-seq. (A) The
distribution of ICs in this t-SNE plot. (B) Heat map showing the gene
expression of five IC types. (C) Gene markers distinguishing the five IC
types from one another by using Seurat. avg_logFC, average log ₂ fold
change.

To distinguish these five types of ICs, we used the FindMarkers function
of Seurat to analyze their gene expression ( Figure 2C ). In addition to
the marker genes above, some genes exhibited evident differences in
their expression. For example, fibroblast 1 showed high CLEC3B , FSTL1 ,
IGFBP6 , and FBN1 expression levels; whereas fibroblast 2 exhibited high
APOD , SFRP2 , CHRDL2 , and C7 expression levels ( Figure 2C ).
Fibroblast 3 showed high DUSP1 , SERPINE1 , and FST expression levels.
Myofibroblasts also exhibited high APOE and PTGDS expression levels (
Figure 2C ). We also discovered a new population of ICs that
specifically expressed ADRA2A and HRH2 ( Figure 3A ). ADRA2A encodes the
α _(2A) -adrenergic receptor which is a receptor that binds to
noradrenaline and adrenaline, ^(²³) whereas HRH2 encodes a H2 histamine
receptor that binds to histamine to indicate allergic reactions. α ₂
-Adrenoceptor stimulation inhibits the field stimulation–induced
contraction of rat bladder in a tetrodotoxin and the parasympathetic
nerve activity in the bladder of rabbits. ^(²⁴)

[fig3]

Figure 3.:

ADRA2A ⁺ ICs can be validated in human bladder tissues. (A) Violin plots
showing the ADRA2A and HRH2 expression levels in each cluster. (B) IHC-P
verified the ADRA2A protein expression (arrows) in human bladder tissue
( Supplemental Table 2 , sample ID: S004). (C) IHC-P verified the cells
of the HRH2 ⁺ (arrows) in human bladder tissue ( Supplemental Table 2 ,
sample ID: S004). (D) IF analysis of the expression of VIM (red), which
is an IC marker, in combination with the novel cell marker ADRA2A
(green) and DNA staining by DAPI (blue) within the tissue paraffin
sections from human bladder samples ( Supplemental Table 2 , sample ID:
S004) verified these novel ICs. (E) We used another marker, HRH2
(green), to verify the same result. Scale bars, 20 μ m.

To further verify the presence of these ICs in human bladder tissue, we
selected ADRA2A and HRH2 for the following experiments ( Figure 3A ). By
using IHC-P on ADRA2A and HRH2 , respectively, these cells can be
observed in human bladder tissues ( Figure 3, B and C , Supplemental
Table 2 ). To validate if these cells were ICs, we performed IF analysis
on the protein level. Immunostaining for ADRA2A , which was identified
by scRNA-seq, and VIM , which is the specific marker of ICs, showed the
two proteins can be merged in one cell ( Figure 3D ). To verify this
result further, we also selected HRH2 and VIM for immunostaining. The
two proteins can be merged in one cell ( Figure 3E ).

Reconstructing the Developmental Trajectory of Human ICs and Discovering Genes that Change as a Function of Pseudotime

We used Monocle2 ^(²⁵) ^(,) ^(²⁶) to understand the relationship between
ICs and their states. In our data, 3328 ICs were included for analysis.
We used reverse graph embedding to generate a trajectory plot, including
five IC populations ( Figure 4A ). Combined with pseudotime analysis (
Figure 4B ), we can conclude the states and relationships among these
ICs. Fibroblast 1 is the beginning of the trajectory, and then
fibroblast 2 is the continuation. Fibroblast 3 appeared as the end of
the trajectory branch 1. Myofibroblast and ADRA2A ⁺ ICs appeared as the
two ends of the trajectory branch 2. Then, after a trajectory was
established, we found the top six genes that have an expression pattern
and varied according to pseudotime. The expression of JUN , PLA2G2A ,
S100A10 , S100A2 , S100A4 , and SH3BGRL3 demonstrated the most evident
changes in pseudotime ( Figure 4C ).

[fig4]

Figure 4.:

Reconstructing the developmental trajectory of ICs can find some genes
that vary as a function of pseudotime. (A) Monocle2-generated
pseudotemporal trajectory of five IC types ( n =3328) imported from
Seurat data, colored by cell-name designation. (B) Pseudotime was
colored in a gradient from dark to light blue, and the start of
pseudotime was indicated. (C) Top six genes calculated by Monocle2 were
shown as dot plots displayed as expression level over pseudotime. (D)
Heat map for clustering the top 50 genes that vary as a function of
pseudotime. The 50 genes were divided into three clusters (cluster 1,
cluster 2, and cluster 3), representing the genes at the beginning
stage, the transitory stage, and the end stage of developmental
trajectory, respectively. Fib1, fibroblast 1; Myo, myofibroblast.

To further analyze the genes in terms of the changes in pseudotime, we
clustered genes via a pseudotemporal expression pattern. The top 50
genes that vary as a function of pseudotime were clustered, as shown by
the heat map ( Figure 4D ). We divided the genes that influence cell
developmental trajectory into three gene clusters. Gene cluster 1
consisted of genes highly expressed at the early stage of developmental
trajectory; this includes genes such as SH3BGRL3 , FN1 , and FSTL1 which
were highly expressed at the beginning stage. Gene cluster 2, which
includes APOD , C7 , and SFRP2 , was highly expressed gene at the
transitory stage of the developmental trajectory. Gene cluster 3, which
includes AREG , LY6D , and RGS5 , was highly expressed gene at the end
stage of developmental trajectory.

Urothelium Cell Clusters and the Discovery of a New Type of Epithelial Cells in Human, Rat, and Mouse Bladder by scRNA-Seq

We objectively defined the epithelial cell–type identities by
subclustering the human bladder epithelial cells ( Figure 5A ). The
epithelial cells can be classified as basal cell 1, basal cell 2,
intermediate cell 1, intermediate cell 2, TNNT1 ⁺ epithelial cells, and
umbrella cells by gene markers ( Table 2 ). Many markers, such as KRT18
, KRT19 , and KRT13 , were highly expressed in two or more cell types (
Figure 5B ). Although the gene expression of these cells was slightly
similar, a heat map of the gene expression among them showed significant
differences ( Figure 5B ). For example, the KRT13 expression in basal
cell 2 was higher than that in basal cell 1, and KRT5 was highly
expressed in basal cells 1 ( Figure 5B ). Intermediate cells can be
classified into two subtypes. The KRT13 , KRT19 , and UPK1B expression
levels in intermediate cell 2 were higher than those in intermediate
cell 1 ( Figure 5B ). By contrast, the uroplakin (UP) gene family (
UPK1A , UPK1B , UPK2 , UPK3A and UPK3B ) was highly expressed in
umbrella cells, whereas intermediate cells showed low UPK1A , UPK1B ,
UPK3A , and UPK3B expression levels ( Figure 5B ).

[fig5]

Figure 5.:

Epithelial cells can be classified into multiple cell types by scRNA-seq
and identified the novel cell type. (A) EC distribution in the t-SNE
plot. (B) Heat map showing the epithelial cells gene expression. (C)
Violin plot showing the expression of TNNT1 in each cluster. (D) Feature
plots of the characteristic markers for all cell types and their
expression levels (shown as gradient of purple). The red circles and
arrows indicate TNNT1 ⁺ cells. (E) IHC-P verified the TNNT1 protein
expression (arrows) in human bladder tissue ( Supplemental Table 2 ,
sample ID: S001). Scale bars, 20 μ m. avg_logFC, average log ₂ fold
change.

Interestingly, we discovered a new type of epithelial cell which
specifically highly expressed TNNT1 ( Figure 5C ). These cells also
highly expressed some gene markers of epithelial cells, such as KRT18
and KRT19 ( Figure 5D ). TNNT1 encodes slow skeletal muscle protein and
is specifically expressed in skeletal muscle fibers. ^(²⁷) However,
TNNT1 ⁺ bladder epithelial cells have never been reported before, which
leads us to speculate whether such cells are epithelial cells with
skeletal muscle characteristics. More importantly, we had to confirm
whether such cells exist in the urothelium. To verify this result, we
performed IHC-P on TNNT1 and found the positive epithelial cells in
seven different human bladder samples ( Figure 5E , Supplemental Figure
8A ). Interestingly, TNNT1 ⁺ epithelial cells also existed in the
bladder urothelium cells of rats and mice ( Supplemental Figure 8, B and
C , Supplemental Table 5 ). The majority of slow skeletal muscle
proteins were found in the umbrella cell layer, but few proteins were
found in the intermediate cell layer. However, not all umbrella cells
expressed these proteins ( Supplemental Figure 9, A and B ).

RNA Velocity Analysis Revealed the Developmental Lineages of Human Bladder Cells

Next we used RNA velocity ^(¹⁵) to study the developmental lineage of
bladder cells. RNA velocity can aid the analysis of developmental
lineages and cellular dynamics, particularly in humans. ^(¹⁵) This
method estimates the rate of gene splicing and degradation based on the
relative abundance of unspliced and spliced mRNA. The direction of the
vector reflects the direction of cell lineage development, and the
length of the vector reflects the rate. In this study, we performed RNA
velocity analysis on human bladder epithelial cells and ICs ( Figure 6,
A and C ), and then projected the RNA velocity results onto the previous
t-SNE plot. Epithelial cells are one of the major cell types in the
bladder. RNA velocity analysis revealed the developmental lineages of
epithelial cells. Bladder epithelial cells can be transformed from basal
cells to intermediate cells and then to umbrella cells or TNNT1 ⁺
epithelial cells ( Figure 6B ). In addition, the developmental lineage
of ICs was similar to the previous results obtained using Monocle2. The
RNA velocity analysis revealed some features about ICs directly:
Fibroblast 1 had longer velocity vectors and some had a tendency to turn
into fibroblast 2 ( Figure 6D ). Some fibroblast 2 velocity-vector
arrows point to myofibroblasts ( Figure 6D ). Together, this result
elucidated some rules about the developmental trajectory of bladder
cells.

[fig6]

Figure 6.:

Pseudotime analysis of human bladder cells by using RNA velocity
reconstructed the developmental lineages. (A) t-SNE plot of all of the
epithelial cells, and different colors correspond to different cell
types. (B) Velocity field projected onto the t-SNE plot of the
epithelial cells (arrows represent average velocity). (C) t-SNE plot of
all of the ICs, and different colors correspond to different cell types.
(D) Velocity field projected onto t-SNE plot of the ICs.

scRNA-Seq Profiling and Unbiased Clustering of Mouse Urinary Bladder

Human bladder cells can be classified into many subtypes, what about
those of the mouse? The reliability and similarity of the mice model in
studying human bladder function, and whether the novel human bladder
cell types exist in mouse bladders, remain unknown. scRNA-seq in mouse
is necessary to address these problems. In a previous study, MCA ^(¹⁰)
provided guidance and a reference for this research. Initially, we used
the MCA bladder data (GEO: GSE108097) for analysis. After filtering
low-quality cells, 11 distinct cell clusters can be identified (
Supplemental Figure 10A ) by their marker genes ( Supplemental Figure
10B ). However, MCA only provided 2498 high-quality bladder cells and
transcriptome information. To establish the transcriptome map of mouse
bladder cells, we performed scRNA-seq of mouse bladder again, and 15,795
cells were obtained ( Supplemental Table 5 ). After filtering out
low-quality cells (Methods), we obtained 12,884 cells. We compared our
mouse data with MCA and found this data were highly correlated with MCA,
and the Pearson correlation coefficient was 0.905 ( Supplemental Figure
10C ). A total of 15 distinct cell clusters can be identified by
unbiased clustering ( Figure 1D , Supplemental Figure 3D ). According to
the marker genes ( Table 2 ) of each type of cells, we classified cells
into clusters 1–15, corresponding to basal cell 1, umbrella cells,
fibroblast 1, basal cell 2, intermediate cells, mixed epithelial cells,
fibroblast 2, fibroblast 3, myofibroblast, monocytes, neuron, smooth
muscle cells, dendritic cells, T cells, and endothelial cells,
respectively ( Figure 1E ). The top five genes expressed in each cell
type are shown in Supplemental Figure 7C .

Homology and Heterogeneity of Human and Mouse Bladder Cells

Although human and mouse are different species, homology and
heterogeneity must exist between their bladder cells. Initially, we
considered all homologous genes with identical gene names between the
human and mouse data sets. We compared the average expression of all
homologous genes in human and mouse bladder cells, and the Pearson
correlation coefficient was 0.855 ( Figure 7A ). Some genes, such as
Krt15 , Gsta4 , and Wfdc2 , were also highly expressed in mouse bladder
cells but low in human bladder cells ( Figure 7A ). On the contrary,
FABP4 , TIMP1 , and S100A2 were highly expressed in human bladder cells
but low in mouse bladder cells ( Figure 7A ).

[figure8-1]

Figure 7-1.:

Comparison of homology and heterogeneity of human and mouse found some
characteristic. (A) Scatterplot shows the homologous genes, with the
average expression (AE) per gene ( n =12,235 genes) in total human
(horizontal) and mouse cells (vertical). The Pearson correlation
coefficient was 0.855 ( r =0.855). The blue line is the regression
curve. Genes with distinct DEGs are marked. (B) Heat map indicating
Pearson correlations on the averaged profiles among each cell type for
human (vertical) and mouse (horizontal). (C) Scatterplot showing the
homologous genes with AE per gene ( n =12,235 genes) in human smooth
muscle cells (HumanSMC) and mouse smooth muscle cells (MouseSMC). (D)
Scatterplot showing the homologous genes with the AE per gene ( n
=12,235 genes) in human fibroblast 2 (HumanFib2) and mouse fibroblast 3
(MouseFib3). (E) Violin plots showing cytokeratin genes expressed in
human epithelial cells, such as basal cell 1 (BC1), basal cells 2 (BC2),
intermediate cell 1 (IMC1), intermediate cell 2 (IMC2), TNNT1 ⁺
epithelial cells (TNNT1), and umbrella cells (UC). (F) Violin plots
showing the cytokeratin genes expressed in mouse epithelial cells, such
as basal cell 1, umbrella cells, basal cell 2, intermediate cells, and
mixed epithelial cells (mixed). (G) Violin plots showing the cytokeratin
genes expressed in MCA mouse epithelial cells, such as basal cells,
umbrella cells, intermediate cells.

[figure8-2]

Figure 7-2.:

Comparison of homology and heterogeneity of human and mouse found some
characteristic. (A) Scatterplot shows the homologous genes, with the
average expression (AE) per gene ( n =12,235 genes) in total human
(horizontal) and mouse cells (vertical). The Pearson correlation
coefficient was 0.855 ( r =0.855). The blue line is the regression
curve. Genes with distinct DEGs are marked. (B) Heat map indicating
Pearson correlations on the averaged profiles among each cell type for
human (vertical) and mouse (horizontal). (C) Scatterplot showing the
homologous genes with AE per gene ( n =12,235 genes) in human smooth
muscle cells (HumanSMC) and mouse smooth muscle cells (MouseSMC). (D)
Scatterplot showing the homologous genes with the AE per gene ( n
=12,235 genes) in human fibroblast 2 (HumanFib2) and mouse fibroblast 3
(MouseFib3). (E) Violin plots showing cytokeratin genes expressed in
human epithelial cells, such as basal cell 1 (BC1), basal cells 2 (BC2),
intermediate cell 1 (IMC1), intermediate cell 2 (IMC2), TNNT1 ⁺
epithelial cells (TNNT1), and umbrella cells (UC). (F) Violin plots
showing the cytokeratin genes expressed in mouse epithelial cells, such
as basal cell 1, umbrella cells, basal cell 2, intermediate cells, and
mixed epithelial cells (mixed). (G) Violin plots showing the cytokeratin
genes expressed in MCA mouse epithelial cells, such as basal cells,
umbrella cells, intermediate cells.

Next, we compared each cell type across each species and found that most
human and mouse bladder cells were relatively well correlated ( Figure
7B ). In these cells, a high correlation was observed between human and
mouse smooth muscle cells, and the Pearson correlation coefficient was
0.837. We compared the heterogeneity of the smooth muscle cells in mouse
and human ( Figure 7C ). For mouse smooth muscle cells, Krt15 , Gsta4 ,
Rpl17 , and Ly6d demonstrated a higher expression in mice than that in
human, whereas ACTC1 , TIMP1 , and CCL2 were highly expressed in human
smooth muscle cells ( Figure 7C ). The Pearson correlation coefficient
was 0.851 between human fibroblast 2 and mouse fibroblast 3, but some
heterogeneity still existed ( Figure 7D ). For example, Clec3b , Gpx3 ,
and Jund were highly expressed in mouse fibroblast 3, whereas S100A4 ,
TIMP1 , SFRP2 , and RPL13A were highly expressed in human fibroblast 2 (
Figure 7D ). Other cell types between human and mouse, such as basal
cells, intermediate cells, umbrella cells, myofibroblast, monocytes, and
T cells, were also well correlated ( Supplemental Figure 11, A–F ).
However, a lower correlation was found between human and mouse
endothelial cells ( Supplemental Figure 11G ).

Cytokeratin is the intermediate filament protein characteristic of
epithelial cells. In human cells, over 20 different cytokeratin isotypes
have been identified. ^(²⁸) We are interested in the cytokeratin
transcriptome expression levels in epithelial cells of different
species. Therefore, we analyzed and compared the expression of the
cytokeratin gene family in human and mouse epithelial cells ( Figure 7,
E–G ). Mouse data were derived from MCA and this paper, and some results
were obtained. Krt17 cannot be captured in the mouse epithelial
transcriptome, and KRT13 was highly expressed in human basal and
intermediate cells but lowly expressed in all mouse epithelial cells (
Figure 7, E–G ). By contrast, the Krt15 expression in mouse epithelial
cells was significantly higher than that in human epithelial cells. (
Figure 7, E–G ). The results of scRNA-seq were verified by
immunohistochemistry ( Supplemental Figure 12, A and B ). However, the
expression levels of the KRT7 , KRT8 , KRT18 , KRT19 , and KRT20 were
similar in human and mouse epithelial cells. These results indicated
human and mouse evolution both had conservative and heterogeneous
aspects.

The Genitourinary Developmental Molecular Anatomy Project (GUDMAP;
http://www.gudmap.org ) provides an ontology of the cell types present
during mammalian urogenital tract development and the molecular
hallmarks of those cells as discerned by a variety of procedures,
including in situ hybridization, transcriptional profiling, and
immunostaining. ^(²⁹) We integrated the urothelium cell data (GUDMAP ID
TS22-TS28) from GUDMAP with our scRNA-seq data for analysis. We found
that most marker genes identified by GUDMAP were expressed in human
bladder urothelium cells of scRNA-seq data, but the expression level was
low ( Figure 8 ). Interestingly, UPK3A was considered as a marker gene
of umbrella cells in GUDMAP, which was also highly expressed in umbrella
cells in our scRNA-seq result ( Figure 8 ). KRT5 was a marker gene of
basal cells that was also highly expressed in the basal cells of our
scRNA-seq result ( Figure 8 ). Through integrated analysis, overlap and
unique genes missed between our study and GUDMAP were identified.

[fig8]

Figure 8.:

Integration of single-cell resolution of different urothelial cells with
the GUDMAP database identified overlap and unique genes missed. Human
bladder urothelial cells were divided into six types and mouse cells
into four types in this study. These cells were divided into three types
in the GUDMAP database: the umbrella cells (UC), intermediate cells
(IMC), and basal cells (BC). We showed the average expression (AE) of
the marker genes in this study and GUDMAP using a heat map. The genes
identified by GUDMAP were confirmed by in situ hybridization. The UPK3A
and KRT 5 were comarkers in this study and GUDMAP. Three results were
obtained: uncertain, not detected, and present. Genes that did not exist
were represented by “NA.”

Discussion

Through the scRNA-seq of bladder cells, our study accurately classified
bladder ICs according to the cell transcriptome, and bladder ICs can be
recognized from another perspective. We discovered a novel IC type (
Figure 3, B–E ) in human bladder. These cells were characterized by the
specific expression of ADRA2A and HRH2 but low PDGFRA expression (
Figure 2B ). ADRA2A encodes the α _(2A) -adrenergic receptor, a receptor
that binds to noradrenaline and adrenaline. ^(²³) The adrenergic
receptor family is considered to be widely distributed in bladder. ^(²⁴)
At the neuroeffector junction between sympathetic nerves and smooth
muscle cells, α ₁ - and α ₂ -adrenoceptors generally mediate contraction
enhancement. ^(³⁰) β -Adrenoceptors were also identified in smooth
muscle tissue and β ₃ -adrenoceptors, which can relax human detrusor
muscles under adrenergic stimulation, may be a new therapeutic target
for OAB treatment. ^(^(31–33))

In contrast, HRH2 , which encodes the H2 histamine receptor, binds to
histamine to activate allergic reactions. The number of mast cells in
bladder tissue of patients with OAB and IC/BPS is significantly higher
than that of the general population. ^(³⁴) To our knowledge, mast cells
can release histamine: in patients with IC/BPS, the histamine and
methylhistamine levels significantly increase in urine. ^(³⁵) These
cells also expressed AVPR1A ( Figure 2B ) which encodes arginine
vasopressin receptor 1A. In addition to the inhibitory effect of
arginine vasopressin on urination, studies have shown that arginine
vasopressin (termed the antidiuretic hormone) can induce bladder
contraction in rats. ^(³⁶) We tried to investigate whether ADRA2A ⁺ ICs
were a new type of endothelial cell. We selected PECAM1 , a marker of
endothelial cells, and ADRA2A for IF. This result did not support that
ADRA2A ⁺ ICs were a new type of endothelial cell. We found that
endothelial cells were not labeled with ADRA2A , whereas ADRA2A ⁺ ICs
were not labeled with PECAM1 ( Supplemental Figure 6B ). We hypothesized
that these ICs may be involved in nerve regulation and allergic
reactions in the bladder and also associated with the physiology and
pathology, such as smooth muscle contraction ( Supplemental Figure 13 ).

However, these ADRA2A ⁺ ICs were not found in the bladder of mice.
According to the scRNA-seq results in mouse, Adra2a and Hrh2 cannot be
detected. IHC-P was performed on Adra2a but a negative result was
obtained ( Supplemental Figure 9C ). In addition, the Adra2a protein was
not detected in mouse or rat bladder tissues by Western blot, whereas it
can be found in human bladder tissues ( Supplemental Figure 9D ). Thus,
these ADRA2A ⁺ ICs appeared to a special type of ICs that can exist in
the human bladder, but not in the mouse bladder.

In our study, we discovered a new type of epithelial cell in human
bladder which specifically expressed TNNT1 ( Figure 5E ). This
interesting result also occurred in the urothelium cells of mice and
rats ( Supplemental Figure 8, B and C ). TNNT1 (encoding slow skeletal
muscle Troponin T) which is an isoform of Troponin T is crucial in the
calcium regulation of actin thin filament function and is essential for
the contraction of striated muscles. ^(²⁷) The TNNT1 ⁺ epithelial cells
may appear in the umbrella cell layer or in the intermediate cell layer.
However, not all urothelium cells expressed these proteins, in humans or
mice ( Supplemental Figure 9, A and B ). It is possible that TNNT1 ⁺
epithelial cells are located at a specific anatomic site of the bladder.
Thus, we hypothesized that these TNNT1 ⁺ epithelial cells may have a
contractile function and play a role in the physiologic process of
bladder filling and emptying. Additionally, these cells will provide a
new insight into the research on urothelium.

Although we showed a high-resolution, single-cell RNA map, we also
realized the percentage of smooth muscle cells was low. The reasons for
this may be that smooth muscle cells are adherent to each other, fail to
disperse adequately, and do not get through the filters. Furthermore, in
this study, human bladder tissues were obtained from patients with
cancer. Although we selected normal tissue remote from the tumor sites,
bladders with cancer usually are described as “unstable,” because there
are some precancerous cells throughout the bladder, including in the
parts that are seemingly uninvolved. However, this is an unavoidable
issue. People do not get cystectomies unless they have bladder cancer,
and the vast majority of the cell types identified in the patients were
also in the mice. Therefore, we consider these results to be reliable.

Overall, our study provides the most comprehensive information on the
cell types found in the normal human and mouse bladders thus far. These
findings provide insights into the discovery of the novel cell type,
specific cell markers, signaling receptors, and gene data set which will
aid in studying the relationship between cell types and bladder
diseases.

Disclosures

None.

Funding

This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (81770759), the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (81370857), National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFC0908000),
and Guangxi Natural Science Fund for Innovation Research Team
(2013GXNSFFA019002).

Published online ahead of print. Publication date available at
www.jasn.org .

Dr. Yu performed scRNA-seq experiments and analyses, performed
immunohistochemistry and IF, made figures, and wrote the paper; Miss
Liao dissected mouse bladder tissues, performed RNA-seq experiments, and
wrote the paper; Dr. Chen dissected mouse bladder tissues and wrote the
paper; Dr. Zou dissected human and mouse bladder tissues, performed
RNA-seq experiments; Dr. Cheng, Prof. Liu, Dr. T. Li, and Dr. Q. Zhang
provided and dissected human bladder tissue; Dr. R. Yang and Dr. Ye
discussed the draft paper and performed bioinformatics and Western blot;
Mr. J. Li performed RNA velocity analysis; Dr. Huang and Miss Long made
figures; Dr. H. Zhang and Dr. X. Yang critically reviewed the
manuscript; Prof. Mo conceived of and supervised the project, analyzed
data, made figures, and wrote the paper; and all authors read and
commented on the manuscript.

Supplemental Material

This article contains the following supplemental material online at
http://jasn.asnjournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1681/ASN.2019040335/-/DCSupplemental
.

Supplemental Figure 1 . Details of single-cell suspension preparation
process.

Supplemental Figure 2 . Quality control (QC) of human bladder single
cell data.

Supplemental Figure 3 . QC of mouse bladder single-cell data.

Supplemental Figure 4 . Distribution of human bladder cells from each
batche.

Supplemental Figure 5 . Distribution of mouse bladder cells from two
reactions.

Supplemental Figure 6 . The IF of human bladder tissues.

Supplemental Figure 7 . Heat map of gene expression in bladder.

Supplemental Figure 8 . The expression of TNNT1 in human, mouse and rat
bladder tissue by IHC-P.

Supplemental Figure 9 . Immunohistochemistry of paraffin (IHC-P) and
Western blot negative results.

Supplemental Figure 10 . Compare mouse bladder data from Mouse Cell
Atlas.

Supplemental Figure 11 . Homology of human and mouse.

Supplemental Figure 12 . IHC-P verified the unique expression
cytokeratin genes of human and mouse urothelium.

Supplemental Figure 13 . Hypothesis diagram of the internal mechanism of
ADRA2A ⁺ ICs.

Supplemental Table 1 . Patient information and sequencing statistics.

Supplemental Table 2 . Patient information of IHC-P/IF.

Supplemental Table 3 . Mice information.

Supplemental Table 4 . Mouse and rat information of IHC-P.

Supplemental Table 5 . Mice sequencing statistics.

Supplemental Table 6 . Summary of clusters about human bladder cells.

Supplemental Table 7 . Summary of clusters about mouse bladder cells.

Supplemental Table 8 . Comparison of the differences between the five
types of ICs.

Supplemental Table 9 . The average expression of every gene in every
cell cluster of human bladder.

Supplemental Table 10 . The average expression of every gene in every
cell cluster of mouse bladder.

References

1. Merrill L, Gonzalez EJ, Girard BM, Vizzard MA: Receptors, channels,
and signalling in the urothelial sensory system in the bladder. Nat Rev
Urol 13: 193–204, 2016 26926246

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

2. Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin AW, Peters CA, Abrams P, Adams MC, et
al.: Campbell-Walsh Urology, Philadelphia, PA, Elsevier, Inc., 2016

-   Cited Here

3. Foxman B: The epidemiology of urinary tract infection. Nat Rev Urol
7: 653–660, 2010 21139641

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

4. Foxman B, Barlow R, D’Arcy H, Gillespie B, Sobel JD: Urinary tract
infection: Self-reported incidence and associated costs. Ann Epidemiol
10: 509–515, 2000 11118930

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

5. Irwin DE, Kopp ZS, Agatep B, Milsom I, Abrams P: Worldwide prevalence
estimates of lower urinary tract symptoms, overactive bladder, urinary
incontinence and bladder outlet obstruction. BJU Int 108: 1132–1138,
2011 21231991

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

6. Berry SH, Elliott MN, Suttorp M, Bogart LM, Stoto MA, Eggers P, et
al.: Prevalence of symptoms of bladder pain syndrome/interstitial
cystitis among adult females in the United States. J Urol 186: 540–544,
2011 21683389

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

7. Sanders KM, Ward SM, Koh SD: Interstitial cells: Regulators of smooth
muscle function. Physiol Rev 94: 859–907, 2014 24987007

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

8. McCloskey KD, Gurney AM: Kit positive cells in the Guinea pig
bladder. J Urol 168: 832–836, 2002 12131376

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

9. Koh BH, Roy R, Hollywood MA, Thornbury KD, McHale NG, Sergeant GP, et
al.: Platelet-derived growth factor receptor-α cells in mouse urinary
bladder: A new class of interstitial cells. J Cell Mol Med 16: 691–700,
2012 22151424

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

10. Han X, Wang R, Zhou Y, Fei L, Sun H, Lai S, et al.: Mapping the
mouse cell atlas by microwell-seq [published correction appears in Cell
173: 1307, 2018]. Cell 172: 1091–1107.e17, 2018 29775597

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

11. Macosko EZ, Basu A, Satija R, Nemesh J, Shekhar K, Goldman M, et
al.: Highly parallel genome-wide expression profiling of individual
cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell 161: 1202–1214, 2015 26000488

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

12. Regev A, Teichmann SA, Lander ES, Amit I, Benoist C, Birney E, et
al.; Human Cell Atlas Meeting Participants: The human cell atlas. ELife
6: e27041, 2017 29206104

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

13. Tirosh I, Izar B, Prakadan SM, Wadsworth MH 2nd, Treacy D, Trombetta
JJ, et al.: Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of metastatic
melanoma by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 352: 189–196, 2016 27124452

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

14. Butler A, Hoffman P, Smibert P, Papalexi E, Satija R: Integrating
single-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions,
technologies, and species. Nat Biotechnol 36: 411–420, 2018 29608179

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

15. La Manno G, Soldatov R, Zeisel A, Braun E, Hochgerner H, Petukhov V,
et al.: RNA velocity of single cells. Nature 560: 494–498, 2018 30089906

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

16. Zheng GX, Terry JM, Belgrader P, Ryvkin P, Bent ZW, Wilson R, et
al.: Massively parallel digital transcriptional profiling of single
cells. Nat Commun 8: 14049, 2017 28091601

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

17. Satija R, Farrell JA, Gennert D, Schier AF, Regev A: Spatial
reconstruction of single-cell gene expression data. Nat Biotechnol 33:
495–502, 2015 25867923

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

18. Koh SD, Lee H, Ward SM, Sanders KM: The mystery of the interstitial
cells in the urinary bladder. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 58: 603–623,
2018 28992432

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

19. Strutz F, Okada H, Lo CW, Danoff T, Carone RL, Tomaszewski JE, et
al.: Identification and characterization of a fibroblast marker: FSP1. J
Cell Biol 130: 393–405, 1995 7615639

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

20. Iwano M, Plieth D, Danoff TM, Xue C, Okada H, Neilson EG: Evidence
that fibroblasts derive from epithelium during tissue fibrosis. J Clin
Invest 110: 341–350, 2002 12163453

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

21. Varga J, Rosenbloom J, Jimenez SA: Transforming growth factor beta
(TGF beta) causes a persistent increase in steady-state amounts of type
I and type III collagen and fibronectin mRNAs in normal human dermal
fibroblasts. Biochem J 247: 597–604, 1987 3501287

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

22. Drake MJ, Fry CH, Eyden B: Structural characterization of
myofibroblasts in the bladder. BJU Int 97: 29–32, 2006 16336323

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

23. Bylund DB, Eikenberg DC, Hieble JP, Langer SZ, Lefkowitz RJ,
Minneman KP, et al.: International Union of Pharmacology nomenclature of
adrenoceptors. Pharmacol Rev 46: 121–136, 1994 7938162

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

24. Michel MC, Vrydag W: Alpha1-, alpha2- and beta-adrenoceptors in the
urinary bladder, urethra and prostate. Br J Pharmacol 147[Suppl 2]:
S88–S119, 2006 16465187

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

25. Trapnell C, Cacchiarelli D, Grimsby J, Pokharel P, Li S, Morse M, et
al.: The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by
pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nat Biotechnol 32: 381–386,
2014 24658644

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

26. Qiu X, Mao Q, Tang Y, Wang L, Chawla R, Pliner HA, et al.: Reversed
graph embedding resolves complex single-cell trajectories. Nat Methods
14: 979–982, 2017 28825705

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

27. Wei B, Jin JP: TNNT1, TNNT2, and TNNT3: Isoform genes, regulation,
and structure-function relationships. Gene 582: 1–13, 2016 26774798

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

28. Southgate J, Harnden P, Trejdosiewicz LK: Cytokeratin expression
patterns in normal and malignant urothelium: A review of the biological
and diagnostic implications. Histol Histopathol 14: 657–664, 1999
10212826

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

29. McMahon AP, Aronow BJ, Davidson DR, Davies JA, Gaido KW, Grimmond S,
et al.; GUDMAP project: GUDMAP: The genitourinary developmental
molecular anatomy project. J Am Soc Nephrol 19: 667–671, 2008 18287559

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

30. Goepel M, Wittmann A, Rübben H, Michel MC: Comparison of
adrenoceptor subtype expression in porcine and human bladder and
prostate. Urol Res 25: 199–206, 1997 9228673

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

31. Yamaguchi O, Chapple CR: Beta3-adrenoceptors in urinary bladder.
Neurourol Urodyn 26: 752–756, 2007 17600372

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

32. Yamaguchi O: Beta3-adrenoceptors in human detrusor muscle. Urology
59[Suppl 1]: 25–29, 2002 12007519

-   Google Scholar

33. Yoshimura N, Kaiho Y, Miyazato M, Yunoki T, Tai C, Chancellor MB, et
al.: Therapeutic receptor targets for lower urinary tract dysfunction.
Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 377: 437–448, 2008 18034230

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

34. Liu HT, Shie JH, Chen SH, Wang YS, Kuo HC: Differences in mast cell
infiltration, E-cadherin, and zonula occludens-1 expression between
patients with overactive bladder and interstitial cystitis/bladder pain
syndrome. Urology 80: 225.e13–225.e18, 2012 22521193

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

35. el-Mansoury M, Boucher W, Sant GR, Theoharides TC: Increased urine
histamine and methylhistamine in interstitial cystitis. J Urol 152:
350–353, 1994 8015069

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

36. Uvelius B, Lundin S, Andersson KE: Content and contractile effect of
arginine vasopressin in rat urinary bladder. Eur J Pharmacol 182:
549–554, 1990 2226623

-   Cited Here |
-   Google Scholar

37. Khandelwal P, Abraham SN, Apodaca G: Cell biology and physiology of
the uroepithelium. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 297: F1477–F1501, 2009
19587142

-   Google Scholar

38. Lee G, Romih R, Zupančič D: Cystitis: From urothelial cell biology
to clinical applications. BioMed Res Int 2014: 473536, 2014 24877098

-   Google Scholar

39. Solway J, Seltzer J, Samaha FF, Kim S, Alger LE, Niu Q, et al.:
Structure and expression of a smooth muscle cell-specific gene, SM22
alpha. J Biol Chem 270: 13460–13469, 1995 7768949

-   Google Scholar

40. Owens GK, Kumar MS, Wamhoff BR: Molecular regulation of vascular
smooth muscle cell differentiation in development and disease. Physiol
Rev 84: 767–801, 2004 15269336

-   Google Scholar

41. Qian J, Kumar A, Szucsik JC, Lessard JL: Tissue and developmental
specific expression of murine smooth muscle gamma-actin fusion genes in
transgenic mice. Dev Dyn 207: 135–144, 1996 8906417

-   Google Scholar

42. Owens GK: Regulation of differentiation of vascular smooth muscle
cells. Physiol Rev 75: 487–517, 1995 7624392

-   Google Scholar

43. Garlanda C, Dejana E: Heterogeneity of endothelial cells. Specific
markers. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 17: 1193–1202, 1997 9261246

-   Google Scholar

44. Young MD, Mitchell TJ, Vieira Braga FA, Tran MGB, Stewart BJ,
Ferdinand JR, et al.: Single-cell transcriptomes from human kidneys
reveal the cellular identity of renal tumors. Science 361: 594–599, 2018
30093597

-   Google Scholar

45. Sauteur L, Krudewig A, Herwig L, Ehrenfeuchter N, Lenard A, Affolter
M, et al.: Cdh5/VE-cadherin promotes endothelial cell interface
elongation via cortical actin polymerization during angiogenic
sprouting. Cell Reports 9: 504–513, 2014 25373898

-   Google Scholar

46. Chen J, Cheung F, Shi R, Zhou H, Lu W; CHI Consortium: PBMC fixation
and processing for Chromium single-cell RNA sequencing. J Transl Med 16:
198, 2018 30016977

-   Google Scholar

47. Villani AC, Satija R, Reynolds G, Sarkizova S, Shekhar K, Fletcher
J, et al.: Single-cell RNA-seq reveals new types of human blood
dendritic cells, monocytes, and progenitors. Science 356: eaah4573, 2017
28428369

-   Google Scholar

48. Geijtenbeek TB, Kwon DS, Torensma R, van Vliet SJ, van Duijnhoven
GC, Middel J, et al.: DC-SIGN, a dendritic cell-specific HIV-1-binding
protein that enhances trans-infection of T cells. Cell 100: 587–597,
2000 10721995

-   Google Scholar

49. Cheong C, Matos I, Choi JH, Dandamudi DB, Shrestha E, Longhi MP, et
al.: Microbial stimulation fully differentiates monocytes to
DC-SIGN/CD209(+) dendritic cells for immune T cell areas. Cell 143:
416–429, 2010 21029863

-   Google Scholar

50. Gil J, Busto EM, Garcillán B, Chean C, García-Rodríguez MC,
Díaz-Alderete A, et al.: A leaky mutation in CD3D differentially affects
αβ and γδ T cells and leads to a Tαβ-Tγδ+B+NK+ human SCID. J Clin Invest
121: 3872–3876, 2011 21926461

-   Google Scholar

51. Flach H, Rosenbaum M, Duchniewicz M, Kim S, Zhang SL, Cahalan MD, et
al.: Mzb1 protein regulates calcium homeostasis, antibody secretion, and
integrin activation in innate-like B cells. Immunity 33: 723–735, 2010
21093319

-   Google Scholar

52. Vockerodt M, Morgan SL, Kuo M, Wei W, Chukwuma MB, Arrand JR, et
al.: The Epstein-Barr virus oncoprotein, latent membrane protein-1,
reprograms germinal centre B cells towards a Hodgkin’s
Reed-Sternberg-like phenotype. J Pathol 216: 83–92, 2008 18566961

-   Google Scholar

53. Mason DY, Cordell JL, Brown MH, Borst J, Jones M, Pulford K, et al.:
CD79a: A novel marker for B-cell neoplasms in routinely processed tissue
samples. Blood 86: 1453–1459, 1995 7632952

-   Google Scholar

54. Chu PG, Arber DA: CD79: A review. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol
9: 97–106, 2001 11396639

-   Google Scholar

55. Brocco MA, Fernández ME, Frasch AC: Filopodial protrusions induced
by glycoprotein M6a exhibit high motility and aids synapse formation.
Eur J Neurosci 31: 195–202, 2010 20074218

-   Google Scholar

56. Scorticati C, Formoso K, Frasch AC: Neuronal glycoprotein M6a
induces filopodia formation via association with cholesterol-rich lipid
rafts. J Neurochem 119: 521–531, 2011 21426347

-   Google Scholar

View full references list

Keywords:

single-cell RNA sequencing; single-cell transcriptomic map; bladder
cells; interstitial cells; epithelial cells

Copyright © 2019 by the American Society of Nephrology

View full article text
