Download PDF []

-   Article
-   Open access
-   Published: 20 January 2021

Dissecting human embryonic skeletal stem cell ontogeny by single-cell transcriptomic and functional analyses

-   Jian He ¹ ^(na1) ,
-   Jing Yan ¹ ^(na1) ,
-   Jianfang Wang ² ^(na1) ,
-   Liangyu Zhao ³ ^(na1) ,
-   Qian Xin ¹ ^(na1) ,
-   Yang Zeng ⁴ ,
-   Yuxi Sun ⁵ ,
-   Han Zhang ⁶ ,
-   Zhijie Bai ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2231-1320 ¹ ,
-   Zongcheng Li ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-5189-5268 ⁴ ,
-   Yanli Ni ⁴ ,
-   Yandong Gong ⁴ ,
-   Yunqiao Li ¹ ,
-   Han He ¹ ,
-   Zhilei Bian ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0680-4029 ⁷ ,
-   Yu Lan ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-4731-5945 ^(8 , 9) ,
-   Chunyu Ma ¹⁰ ,
-   Lihong Bian ¹⁰ ,
-   Heng Zhu [] ¹¹ ,
-   Bing Liu [] ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7313-6924 ^(1 , 4 , 8) &
-   …
-   Rui Yue [] ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-3401-369X ²

[] Show authors

Cell Research volume 31 , pages 742–757 ( 2021 ) Cite this article

-   14k Accesses

-   60 Citations

-   11 Altmetric

-   Metrics details

Abstract

Human skeletal stem cells (SSCs) have been discovered in fetal and adult
long bones. However, the spatiotemporal ontogeny of human embryonic SSCs
during early skeletogenesis remains elusive. Here we map the
transcriptional landscape of human limb buds and embryonic long bones at
single-cell resolution to address this fundamental question. We found
remarkable heterogeneity within human limb bud mesenchyme and
epithelium, and aligned them along the proximal–distal and
anterior–posterior axes using known marker genes. Osteo-chondrogenic
progenitors first appeared in the core limb bud mesenchyme, which give
rise to multiple populations of stem/progenitor cells in embryonic long
bones undergoing endochondral ossification. Importantly, a perichondrial
embryonic skeletal stem/progenitor cell (eSSPC) subset was identified,
which could self-renew and generate the osteochondral lineage cells, but
not adipocytes or hematopoietic stroma. eSSPCs are marked by the
adhesion molecule CADM1 and highly enriched with FOXP1/2 transcriptional
network. Interestingly, neural crest-derived cells with similar
phenotypic markers and transcriptional networks were also found in the
sagittal suture of human embryonic calvaria. Taken together, this study
revealed the cellular heterogeneity and lineage hierarchy during human
embryonic skeletogenesis, and identified distinct skeletal
stem/progenitor cells that orchestrate endochondral and intramembranous
ossification.

Similar content being viewed by others

[]

Insights into skeletal stem cells

Article Open access 19 October 2022

[]

Cellular taxonomy of Hic1 ⁺ mesenchymal progenitor derivatives in the limb: from embryo to adult

Article Open access 25 August 2022

[]

A Wnt-mediated transformation of the bone marrow stromal cell identity orchestrates skeletal regeneration

Article Open access 16 January 2020

Introduction

Multipotent and self-renewing skeletal stem cells (SSCs) were identified
in the growth plate of early postnatal mice by prospective isolation and
genetic lineage-tracing studies. ^(1 , 2) SSCs were also found within
PTHrP ⁺ chondrocytes in the resting zone of mouse postnatal growth
plate, ³ and in the periosteum of postnatal long bones and calvaria
(also known as periosteal stem cells, PSCs). ⁴ Importantly, human SSCs
were recently identified in the growth plate of 17-week-old fetal long
bones, suggesting that SSCs exist in higher vertebrate species and
earlier developmental stages. ⁵ Similar to bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSCs, or perivascular SSCs) that maintain the adult skeleton,
^(6 , 7 , 8 , 9) mouse and human growth plate SSCs generate
chondrocytes, osteoblasts and hematopoietic stroma upon in vivo
transplantation. ^(1 , 5) However, they do not differentiate into
adipocytes, highlighting the functional differences of SSCs from
distinct developmental stages and skeletal compartments. ^(10 , 11)
Lineage-tracing studies in mice revealed multiple waves of
osteoprogenitors during skeletal development. ^(12 , 13 , 14) In
contrast, the ontogeny of human embryonic SSCs during early
skeletogenesis remains largely unknown. Given that the adult skeleton
repairs in a way that recapitulates embryonic development, elucidation
of the human embryonic SSC populations will definitely shed light on
novel cell therapies that promote skeletal regeneration.

In vertebrates, the earliest progenitors of appendicular skeleton are
formed within the limb buds. ^(15 , 16) Limb patterning along the
anterior–posterior (AP) axis is regulated by sonic hedgehog (SHH)
signals from the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA), ¹⁷ while the
proximal–distal (PD) axis patterning is mainly regulated by FGF signals
from the apical ectodermal ridge (AER). ^(18 , 19) The distal
mesenchymal cells underlying AER are undifferentiated and highly
proliferative when receiving the FGF and WNT signals, ^(20 , 21) which
form the progress zone that elongates the limb buds. The core limb bud
mesenchyme expresses SOX9 to specify the osteo-chondrogenic lineage and
generate the primordial cartilage template. Although different
mesenchymal progenitors have been identified in mouse and chick limb
buds, ^(22 , 23) the cellular heterogeneity and lineage hierarchy within
human limb buds remain unknown.

After chondrogenic differentiation of limb bud mesenchymal progenitors,
long bones are generated by endochondral ossification. ²⁴ Blood vessels
invade the center of the cartilage template with perichondrial
osteoprogenitors to form the primary ossification center (POC),
^(12 , 14) where osteoblasts, vascular endothelial cells, pericytes and
hematopoietic cells populate to form the nascent bone marrow.
^(25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29) In contrast, calvarial bones are generated by
intramembranous ossification, which involves cranial mesenchyme
condensation and direct mineralization on top of the cartilage anlagen.
^(30 , 31 , 32 , 33) Whereas long bones are derived from lateral plate
mesoderm, calvarial bones are derived from both neural crest and
paraxial mesoderm that generate different parts of the calvarium.
^(34 , 35) Interestingly, SSCs from mouse long bones and calvaria (or
PSCs) share similar phenotypic markers (Lineage ^(–) CD51 ^(+/low) Thy1
^(–) 6C3 ^(–) CD200 ⁺ CD105 ^(–) ). ^(1 , 4) Whether the embryonic long
bones and calvaria contain skeletal stem/progenitor cells that share
similar molecular features remains to be explored.

Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a powerful tool in dissecting
the cellular composition and lineage hierarchy within heterogeneous or
rare cell populations. ^(36 , 37 , 38) In the musculoskeletal system, a
high-throughput scRNA-seq study during mouse embryonic development
reported the transcriptional landscapes of AER, limb bud mesenchyme and
skeletal muscle before POC formation. ³⁹ Recent scRNA-seq studies in
adult mouse bone marrow also revealed the cellular heterogeneity of
BMSCs, endothelial cells and osteo-chondrogenic lineage cells under
homeostatic and stress conditions. ^(40 , 41 , 42) scRNA-seq profiling
during axolotl limb regeneration identified convergence of connective
tissue cells back to multipotent skeletal progenitors that formed a limb
bud-like blastema structure. ⁴³ In contrast, scRNA-seq studies of the
human embryonic skeletogenesis are still lacking.

In this study, we generated the first comprehensive human embryonic
skeletogenesis cell atlas by scRNA-seq. By systematically examining the
cellular heterogeneity and lineage hierarchies within multiple skeletal
compartments, we identified distinct skeletal stem/progenitor cells in
human embryonic long bones and calvaria.

Results

Integrated analyses of single-cell transcriptomes during limb bud and long bone development

To test whether SSCs exist during embryogenesis, we analyzed human limb
buds at 5 weeks post conception (WPC), as well as human limb long bones
at 8 WPC. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining showed condensed
mesenchyme within limb buds, and the nascent bone marrow cavity in the
center of long bones (Fig. 1a ). To map the single-cell transcriptomes,
upper and lower limb buds (5 WPC, n = 3 embryos from three independent
experiments, Supplementary information, Fig. S1a ), as well as forelimb
and hindlimb long bones (8 WPC, n = 3 embryos from three independent
experiments, Supplementary information, Fig. S1a ) were dissected and
subjected to enzymatic digestions. Dissociated cells were then sorted by
flow cytometry to obtain live single cells for 3’ scRNA-seq on a 10×
Genomics platform (Fig. 1b ). After quality control and doublet
exclusion, we obtained 19,890 single cells in 5 WPC limb buds and 15,680
single cells in 8 WPC long bones (Supplementary information, Fig. S1a ).
On average, we detected 2841 genes (10,212 unique molecular identities,
UMI) per cell with less than 2.4% mitochondrial genes (Supplementary
information, Fig. S1a ). Normal karyotype was inferred by calculating
copy number variation (CNV) scores on 100 randomly sampled cells for
each embryo (Supplementary information, Fig. S1b ). ⁴⁴ We performed
canonical correlation analysis (CCA) to normalize variance and correct
batch effects among different samples. ⁴⁵ Integrated analysis of the
limb bud and long bone samples revealed 16 subsets (Fig. 1c ;
Supplementary information, Fig. S1c ). The robustness of cell clustering
was validated by calculating silhouette values (Supplementary
information, Fig. S1d ), ⁴⁶ and by random sampling and re-clustering
analysis (Supplementary information, Fig. S1e ).

[figure 1]

a Representative stereoscope images (left) and H&E images (right) of 5
WPC human limb bud and 8 WPC human long bone ( n = 2 embryos). Scale
bars, 100 μm. b Sampling workflow and experimental scheme. Human
embryonic cells from 5 WPC limb buds and 8 WPC long bones were sorted
and subjected to droplet-based scRNA-seq. c Distribution of 35,570 cells
from limb buds and long bones. In total, 16 subsets were visualized by
uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP). d Dot plots
showing the expression of curated feature genes in 16 subsets. Dot size
represented the proportion of cells expressing specific gene in the
indicated subset and color bar represented the gene expression levels. e
Proportion of cells from 5 WPC limb buds and 8 WPC long bones in each
subset. f Developmental trajectory inferred by RNA velocity and
visualized on the UMAP projection. g Partition-based graph abstraction
(PAGA) showing the connectivity among subsets in f . The mean expression
of representative genes (Mesenchymal, PRRX1 ; Chondrogenic, SOX9 ;
Osteogenic, RUNX2 ) in each subset was shown in abstracted graph. Line
thickness indicated the strength of connectivity. Color bar represents
the gene expression levels.

Full size image []

Fig. 1: Integrated analysis of human limb buds and embryonic long bones.

We found three PRRX1 ⁺ limb bud mesenchymal subsets (LBM1–3) that mainly
exist in 5 WPC limb buds (clusters 1–3), which differentially expressed
PDGFRA , reflecting mesenchymal progenitors at different maturation
stages (Fig. 1c–e ). ²² Notably, cluster 4 is a mesenchymal subset that
equally distributed between limb bud and long bone samples, which
expressed PRRX1 , low level of SOX9 and the highest level of PDGFRA ,
reminiscent of osteo-chondrogenic progenitors (OCPs) that give rise to
long bones (Fig. 1c–e ). ²² EPCAM ⁺ epithelial cells (clusters 14 and
15) ⁴⁷ and GYPA ⁺ erythrocytes (cluster 13) ⁴⁸ were mainly detected in
limb buds, while SIX1 ⁺ myoprogenitors (cluster 9), ⁴⁹ CDH5 ⁺
endothelial cells (cluster 11) ⁵⁰ and CD68 ⁺ macrophages (cluster 12) ⁵¹
were found in both samples (Fig. 1c–e ). In contrast, RUNX2 ⁺
osteoprogenitors (cluster 5), ⁵² OSR2 ⁺ NOV ⁺ perichondrial mesenchymal
stromal cells (PMSCs, cluster 6), ^(53 , 54) SOX9 ⁺ chondroblasts and
chondrocytes (clusters 7 and 8), ⁵⁵ MYOG ⁺ myocytes (cluster 10), ⁵⁶ as
well as SOX10 ⁺ Schwann cells (cluster 16) ⁵⁷ were mainly detected in
long bones (Fig. 1c–e ; Supplementary information, Table S1 ).

Pearson correlation analysis clearly distinguished the skeletogenic and
non-skeletogenic subsets (Supplementary information, Fig. S1f ).
Pseudotime analysis by RNA velocity ⁵⁸ showed a differentiation
continuum from limb bud mesenchymal progenitors to OCPs, followed by
cell fate specification into osteogenic and chondrogenic lineages (Fig.
1f ). Partition-based graph abstraction (PAGA) analysis ⁵⁹ showed a
pivotal role of OCPs in linking limb bud mesenchymal progenitors (PRRX1
⁺ ) to PMSC/chondroblasts/chondrocytes (SOX9 ⁺ ) and osteoprogenitors
(RUNX2 ⁺ ) in embryonic long bones (Fig. 1g ). Next, we separately
analyzed the limb bud and long bone samples, with a special focus on the
OCP lineage.

Delineating mesenchymal lineage specification during limb bud development

We were able to identify 10 subsets in 5 WPC human limb buds (Fig. 2a ).
Hierarchical cluster analysis within the 4 mesenchymal subsets showed
that LBM1 (cluster 1) clustered with LBM2 (cluster 2), while LBM3
(cluster 3) and OCP (cluster 4) clustered together (Fig. 2b ). Of the
two epithelial subsets (Fig. 2a ), only cluster 9 (corresponds to
Epithelium 1, Fig. 1c, d ) highly expressed AER marker FGF8, consistent
with previous study in mouse embryos. ³⁹ Surprisingly, PAGA analysis
revealed a strong correlation between LBM2 and epithelial subsets (Fig.
2c ), raising the possibility that LBM2 might represent progress zone
mesenchyme that lies underneath the limb bud epithelium. ^(16 , 60)
Consistent with this hypothesis, cell cycle analysis showed that LBM2
was more proliferative as compared to other mesenchymal subsets, with
more cells in G2/M phase (Fig. 2d ). Gene ontology (GO) analysis showed
that LBM2 was enriched with genes regulating metabolic processes, while
LBM3 and OCP were enriched with genes involved in embryonic skeletal
development and ossification (Fig. 2e ).

[figure 2]

a UAMP visualization of the ten subsets in 5 WPC limb buds. b
Hierarchical clustering of the mesenchymal and epithelial subsets using
top 50 principal components (PCs). c The inferred relationships among
the mesenchymal and epithelial subsets in PAGA layout. d Stacked bar
charts showing the cell cycle distributions in the mesenchymal subsets.
e Enriched GO terms of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the
mesenchymal subsets. f Heatmap showing expression of curated HOX genes
scaled across the mesenchymal subsets. Hox genes were clustered into two
branches based on hierarchical clustering of the rows, as indicated in
green and purple. g Visualization of the mesenchymal subsets (left) with
UMAP plots showing the expression of curated PD and AP marker genes
(right; Proximal, MEIS2 ; Distal, HOXD13 ; Anterior, IRX3 ; Posterior,
SHH ). h GSVA analysis of pathway enrichment in the proximal and core
mesenchyme (LBM3/OCP) and distal mesenchyme (LBM1/2). T values for each
pathway were shown (two-sided unpaired limma-moderated t -test). i
Heatmap showing the area under the curve (AUC) score of regulons
enriched in the mesenchymal subsets (left). Z -score (row scaling) was
computed. Representative regulons were shown on the right. The number of
predicted target genes for each regulon was shown in the parenthesis.
Hierarchical clustering on columns indicated correlation between cell
subsets. Binary activities of representative regulons were shown by UMAP
plots (right).

Full size image []

Fig. 2: Characterization of human limb bud mesenchyme and epithelium.

During limb bud outgrowth, HOX gene expressions switch from 3′ to 5′
topologically associating domains along the PD axis. ⁶¹ We found that
LBM3 preferentially expressed 3′ HOX genes such as HOX2 – 6 , while LBM1
and LBM2 preferentially expressed 5’ HOX genes such as HOX9 – 11 ,
suggesting that they represented proximal (LBM3) and distal (LBM1 and
LBM2) mesenchymal cells, respectively (Fig. 2f ). In contrast, OCP
expressed both 3’ and 5’ HOX genes, reminiscent of the core condensed
mesenchyme that gives rise to the skeletal tissues (Fig. 2f ).
Consistent with this, when we aligned the mesenchymal subsets along the
PD and AP axes using known marker genes such as MEIS2 , IRX3 , HOXD13
and SHH (Fig. 2g ), LBM3 and OCP were positioned at the proximal end,
while LBM1 and LBM2 were positioned at the distal end (Fig. 2g ). Of
note, the distal most localization of LBM2 was in line with the position
of progress zone. Consistent with previous studies, ^(62 , 63) gene set
variation analysis (GSVA) showed that the proximal and core mesenchyme
was enriched with genes related to retinoic acid and PDGF signaling,
while the distal mesenchyme was enriched with genes related to Hedgehog,
FGF, TGFβ and Notch signaling (Fig. 2h ).

To explore the gene regulatory networks (regulons) that determine cell
fate specification in the mesenchymal subsets, we applied single-cell
regulatory network inference and clustering (SCENIC) method to score the
activity of regulons by an AUCell algorithm (AUC score), which reflects
the co-expression of transcription factors (TFs) and their downstream
target genes in each individual cell. ⁶⁴ Hierarchical clustering of the
AUC scores again distinguished proximal/core and distal mesenchymal
subsets (Fig. 2i ). MSX1 and PITX1 regulons were enriched in LBM1 and
LBM2, ^(65 , 66) while PBX1 and SOX9 regulons were enriched in LBM3 and
OCP. ^(22 , 67) Interestingly, we also identified several OCP-specific
regulons such as ZMIZ1 and KDM5A (Fig. 2i ; Supplementary information,
Table S2 ), which were shown to play important roles in
neurodevelopmental disorder ⁶⁸ and osteoporosis, ⁶⁹ suggesting novel
osteo-chondrogenic regulators within the limb bud mesenchyme.

To explore evolutionarily conserved and species-specific features during
limb bud development, we analyzed a recently published scRNA-seq dataset
of mouse hindlimb buds at similar embryonic stage (E11.5) (Supplementary
information, Fig. S2a ). ⁷⁰ SciBet is a recently developed algorithm
that predicts cell identity by training multinomial model with given
dataset. ⁷¹ By training SciBet with our human dataset, we found that
most human subsets were conserved in mouse except that LBM2 and
epithelium (non-AER) subsets were not predicted in mouse limb buds
(Supplementary information, Fig. S2b and Table S1 ). The lack of a
highly proliferative LBM2 subset implied advanced maturation of E11.5
mouse limb buds (Supplementary information, Fig. S2a ). ⁷² Consistent
with this, the mouse OCP subset highly expressed SOX9 (Supplementary
information, Fig. S2c ), suggesting early chondrogenic differentiation.
A much lower proportion of mouse AER was found within limb bud
epithelium (6%) as compared to human AER (69%, Supplementary
information, Fig. S2d ), consistent with much shorter limbs in mouse.

Taken together, these data revealed the cellular heterogeneity and
species-specific features of human limb bud mesenchyme and epithelium.
Since osteogenesis is not initiated in 5 WPC human limb buds, we went on
to analyze 8 WPC long bones in search of human embryonic SSCs.

Delineating osteochondral lineage specification during long bone development

We analyzed the long bone dataset from 8 WPC human embryos
(Supplementary information, Fig. S3a ) and divided the osteochondral
lineage cells (OCLCs) into 7 subsets (Fig. 3a ). In addition to
previously identified osteoprogenitor, PMSC, chondroblast and
chondrocyte subsets (Fig. 3a , clusters 4–7), the OCP subset as revealed
by integrated analysis (Fig. 1c ) was subdivided into 3 subsets
(clusters 1–3). Cluster 1 highly expressed CXCL12 and PDGFRA
(Supplementary information, Fig. S3b and Table S1 ), which are classical
markers of BMSCs. ^(28 , 73) Cluster 2 highly expressed limb bud
mesenchymal genes such as TWIST2 (Supplementary information, Fig. S3a, b
and Table S1 ), which functions as an inhibitor of osteoblastic
differentiation, ⁷⁴ reminiscent of limb bud-derived mesenchymal cells
(LBDMCs). Cluster 3 highly expressed GAS2 and localized in the center of
all OCLC subsets (Fig. 3a ; Supplementary information, Fig. S3a, b and
Table S1 ). GO analysis showed significant enrichment of genes related
to organ and appendage morphogenesis in clusters 1–3 (Fig. 3b ).
Interestingly, genes related to stem cell proliferation were enriched in
cluster 3 (Fig. 3b ), suggesting that it might contain embryonic
skeletal stem/progenitor cells (eSSPCs).

[figure 3]

a UMAP visualization of seven OCLC subsets in 8 WPC human long bones. b
Enriched GO terms of DEGs among the seven OCLC subsets. c Developmental
trajectory of seven OCLC subsets inferred by RNA velocity and visualized
on the UMAP projection. d Diffusion map visualization of the osteogenic
and chondrogenic trajectories simulated by Slingshot across LBDMC,
eSSPC, osteoprogenitor, chondroblast and chondrocyte subsets. The
corresponding diffusion pseudotime was indicated in the upper right
frame. e Heatmap of gene expressions (smoothed over 20 adjacent cells)
in LBDMC, eSSPC, osteoprogenitor, chondroblast and chondrocyte subsets
ordered by pseudotime of osteogenesis and chondrogenesis in d . Top 200
genes were selected according to the P values of GVM test and
representative genes were shown. Shared genes in the two trajectories
were indicated in dashed box. f Heatmap showing the AUC score of
regulons enriched in human OCLC subsets. Z -score (row scaling) was
calculated. Representative regulons were shown on the right. The number
of predicted target genes for each regulon was shown in the parenthesis.
g Binary activities of FOXP1 and FOXP2 regulons were shown by UMAP
plots. h The FOXP1 and FOXP2 regulon networks in OCLC subsets. Line
thickness indicated the level of GENIE3 weights. Dot size indicated the
number of enriched TF motifs. i , j Immunofluorescent images of FOXP1 (
i ) and FOXP2 ( j ) expression in 8 WPC human femur. FOXP1/2 ⁺ cells
were detected in the perichondrium (I) and inside POC (II). Merged and
single-channel images of FOXP1/2 (red) and DAPI (blue) were shown ( n
= 2 embryos). Scale bars in snapshot images, 200 μm; scale bars in
magnified images, 50 μm.

Full size image []

Fig. 3: Characterization of the osteochondral lineage in human long
bones identified embryonic SSCs.

Next, pseudotime analysis by RNA velocity was performed to explore the
lineage relationships among OCLC subsets (Fig. 3c ). We observed strong
directional streams from eSSPC toward osteoprogenitor,
chondroblast/chondrocyte and PMSC subsets (Fig. 3c ). Interestingly,
LBDMC was upstream of both eSSPC and BMSC, which formed two
differentiation trajectories (Fig. 3c ). Diffusion map analysis of
LBDMC, eSSPC, chondroblast/chondrocyte and osteoprogenitor subsets
simulated two differentiation trajectories featuring chondrogenesis and
osteogenesis (Fig. 3d ). Consistent with the RNA velocity analysis,
eSSPC was located at the branching point of osteogenesis and
chondrogenesis (Fig. 3d ). When LBDMC was set as the root to identify
temporally expressed genes over pseudotime, we found that genes highly
expressed in LBDMCs (e.g., PITX1 , HOXA10 , CRABP1 , CD24 ) and eSSPCs
(e.g., GAS1/2 , SOX4 and SFRP2 ) were gradually down-regulated, while
genes that highly expressed in chondrocytes (e.g., CNMD , EPYC , COL9A2
, COL11A2 ) and osteoprogenitors (e.g., DLX5 , CDH11 , OGN and COL1A1/2
) were up-regulated upon terminal differentiation (Fig. 3e ). SCENIC
analysis showed that eSSPCs were highly enriched with regulons such as
FOXP1 and FOXP2 (Fig. 3f ; Supplementary information, Table S2 ). The
FOXP1 regulon seemed to be more specific to eSSPCs, as the FOXP2 regulon
was also enriched in LBMDCs and osteoprogenitors (Fig. 3g ).
Nevertheless, FOXP1/2 did share a significant amount of target genes in
eSSPCs (Fig. 3h ).

Foxp1/2/4 are transcriptional repressors that are highly expressed in
perichondral skeletal progenitors and proliferating chondrocytes during
mouse endochondral ossification, ⁷⁵ which promote chondrogenesis and
inhibit premature osteogenic differentiation. ⁷⁵ Consistent with this,
immunofluorescent staining showed that FOXP1/2 ⁺ cells localized in the
perichondrial regions of 8 WPC human long bones (Fig. 3i, j ). A few
FOXP1/2 ⁺ cells were also detected inside the POC, reminiscent of
perichondrial skeletal progenitors that had invaded the cartilage
template ¹² (Fig. 3i, j ). We also analyzed a published scRNA-seq
dataset of mouse hindlimb long bones at similar embryonic stage (E15.5)
(Supplementary information, Fig. S3c, d ). ⁷⁰ SciBet analysis found that
human eSSPC was evolutionarily conserved in mouse long bones
(Supplementary information, Fig. S3e ). Interestingly, Foxp1/2/4
regulons were highly enriched in mouse eSSPCs (Supplementary
information, Fig. S3f, g and Table S2 ), suggesting a fundamental role
of FOXP family TFs in regulating eSSPCs during endochondral
ossification.

Taken together, we identified three OCP subsets in 8 WPC human long
bones, of which eSSPC represented a novel perichondrial subset that
could potentially regulate long bone development and POC formation.

Identification of CADM1 as a phenotypic marker of eSSPCs

To prospectively isolate eSSPCs for functional characterizations ex
vivo, we first screened for cell surface markers that were
differentially expressed among long bone OCLC subsets. Interestingly, we
found that the cell adhesion molecule CADM1 was preferentially expressed
in eSSPCs (Fig. 4a ). SCENIC analysis showed that FOXP1/2-binding motifs
were highly enriched in the predicted cis -regulatory elements of CADM1
among all co-expressed target genes (Fig. 3h ), suggesting that it could
be used as a legitimate phenotypic marker of eSSPCs. Since CADM1 was
also expressed in Schwann cells (Fig. 4a ), we sought to further enrich
eSSPCs by combining with previously reported SSC or BMSC markers (Fig.
4a ). ^(1 , 5 , 11) Interestingly, we found that PDPN was differentially
expressed in eSSPCs (PDPN ⁺ ) and Schwann cells (PDPN ^(–) ) (Fig. 4a ).
Immunofluorescent staining of CADM1 and PDPN on 8 WPC human long bone
sections showed that PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells mainly localize in the
perichondrial regions and inside the POC (Fig. 4b ; Supplementary
information, Fig. S4b ), which were reminiscent of the FOXP1/2 ⁺ cells
(Fig. 3i, j ).

[figure 4]

a Dot plots showing the expression of differentially expressed cell
surface genes (left) and candidate SSC markers (right) in 8 WPC human
long bone subsets. Asterisks indicated positive markers that were used
to enrich eSSPCs. b Immunofluorescent images of PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells in
8 WPC human long bones. Overviews of PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells (arrows) in
the articular (upper left) and POC (bottom left) regions were shown on
the left. PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells were found in the inner layer of
perichondrium in the articular regions (I) and surrounding POC (II). A
few PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells were also found inside POC (III). Arrow heads
indicated enlarged PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells. Merged and single-channel
images of DAPI (blue), CADM1 (red) and PDPN (green) were shown ( n = 2
embryos). Scale bars in snapshot images, 50 μm; scale bars in magnified
images, 5 μm. c Flow cytometry gating strategies for sorting different
populations in 8 WPC long bones ( n = 3 embryos). d Representative
crystal violet staining of CFU-F colonies generated by the sorted
populations as indicated in c . Magnified images of the boxed areas were
shown on the right. Scale bars, 25 μm. e Quantifications of the number
(left) and mean diameter (right) of the CFU-F colonies ( n = 3 embryos).
The statistical significance of differences was determined using one-way
ANOVA with multiple comparison tests (LSD). * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01; ***
P < 0.001. Error bars indicated SEM.

Full size image []

Fig. 4: Identification of CADM1 as a phenotypic marker of eSSPCs.

In silico transcript-averaged cell scoring (TACS) analysis ⁷⁶ revealed
that the purity of eSSPCs could be further improved by enrichment of
PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells among OCLC subsets (Supplementary
information, Fig. S4a ). In contrast, THY1 (CD90), NGFR (CD271), MCAM
(CD146) or NT5E (CD73) were hardly detected in eSSPCs (Fig. 4a ;
Supplementary information, Fig. S4a ). Next, we sorted PDGFRA ^(low/–)
PDPN ^(–) , PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ^(–) and PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺
CADM1 ⁺ cells from 8 WPC human long bones by flow cytometry (Fig. 4c ),
and performed colony-forming unit-fibroblast (CFU-F) and mesenchymal
sphere cultures to assess their colony- and sphere-forming efficiencies
ex vivo. As compared to PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ^(–) cells (4.67 ± 1.20
colonies per 4.5 × 10 ³ cells and 1.13 ± 0.07 mm diameters), PDGFRA
^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ^(–) cells showed significantly higher
colony-forming efficiency with colonies of larger size (25.67 ± 1.67
colonies per 4.5 × 10 ³ cells and 2.58 ± 0.06 mm diameters, Fig. 4d, e
). Remarkably, PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells showed an even
higher colony-forming efficiency with significantly more colonies of
larger size (69.33 ± 5.61 colonies per 4.5 × 10 ³ cells and
3.66 ± 0.23 mm diameters) as compared to PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1
^(–) cells (Fig. 4d, e ). Mesenchymal sphere formation analyses showed
similar results (Supplementary information, Fig. S4c, d ). PDGFRA ⁺
cells showed lower colony-forming efficiency with colonies of smaller
size (13.00 ± 1.00 colonies per 4.5 × 10 ³ cells and 2.68 ± 0.21 mm
diameters) as compared to PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells
(Supplementary information, Fig. S4e, f ) and exhibited trilineage
differentiation potential (Supplementary information, Fig. S4g, h ),
reminiscent of BMSCs in the nascent POC.

To further validate that these phenotypic markers indeed enrich eSSPCs,
we performed scRNA-seq analysis on flow cytometrically sorted PDGFRA
^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells. Clustering analysis revealed two distinct
subsets, including 93.3% eSSPCs that expressed FOXP1 , FOXP2 and GAS2 ,
and 6.7% Schwann cells that expressed SOX2 , SOX10 and MPZ
(Supplementary information, Fig. S5a, b ). Similarity analysis also
confirmed that eSSPCs were highly enriched in PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺
CADM1 ⁺ cells (Supplementary information, Fig. S5c ).

eSSPCs self-renew and undergo osteo-chondrogenic differentiation

To test the self-renewal and differentiation potentials of eSSPCs, we
first sorted PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells to perform serial
CFU-F colony formation assay. Single CFU-F colonies formed by flow
cytometrically sorted PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells were clonally
expanded and serially passaged, which could generate secondary and
tertiary colonies that maintained the eSSPC immunophenotypes (Fig. 5a ;
Supplementary information, Fig. S5d ). Next, we performed in vitro
trilineage differentiation on nonclonal and clonal cultures (cells were
clonally expanded from single CFU-F colonies) of PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺
CADM1 ⁺ cells, and found that they underwent osteogenic and chondrogenic
differentiation, but not adipogenic differentiation (Fig. 5b ;
Supplementary information, Fig. S5e ). In contrast, PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN
⁺ CADM1 ^(–) cells only underwent osteogenic differentiation
(Supplementary information, Fig. S5g ). The differentiation efficiencies
were quantified by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) analysis of
adipogenic ( ADIPOQ and PPARG ), osteogenic ( RUNX2 and SP7 ) and
chondrogenic ( SOX9 and COL2A1 ) marker genes (Fig. 5c ; Supplementary
information, Fig. S5f, h ).

[figure 5]

a Flow cytometry plots showing the maintenance of phenotypic eSSPCs
after serially passaging clonally expanded PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1
⁺ cells ( n = 3 clones). b Representative oil red O (top), alizarin red
(middle) and toluidine blue (bottom) staining after adipogenic,
osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation of clonally expanded eSSPCs
(PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ ). Magnified images of the boxed areas
were shown on the right. Scale bars, 200 μm. c qPCR analyses of
adipogenic, osteogenic and chondrogenic marker genes in clonally
expanded eSSPCs before and after trilineage differentiation in vitro ( n
= 3 clones). The statistical significance of differences was determined
using Wilcoxon signed rank test. * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01. Error bars
indicated SEM. d Renal subcapsular transplantation. The work flow for
functional characterization of eSSPC in vivo (top). Subcapsular
xenografts were dissected and sectioned 8 weeks after transplantation of
culture expanded eSSPCs into immunodeficient mice. Bright field
(middle), Movat pentachrome staining (bottom left; cartilage, blue; bone
and fibrous tissue, yellow) and immunofluorescent staining images
(bottom right; DAPI, blue; collagen I (COL1), red; collagen II (COL2),
green) were shown ( n = 9 grafts from three embryos). Scale bars, 50 μm.

Full size image []

Fig. 5: Functional characterizations of eSSPCs in vitro and in vivo.

To test the in vivo differentiation potentials of PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺
CADM1 ⁺ and PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ^(–) cells, we performed renal
subcapsular transplantation of nonclonal cell cultures in
immunodeficient mice. Eight weeks after transplantation, the subcapsular
grafts were harvested and sectioned. Movat pentachrome staining and
immunofluorescent staining of collagen I and II revealed
osteo-chondrogenic differentiation of PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺
(Fig. 5d ). In contrast, PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ^(–) cells
underwent osteogenic but not chondrogenic differentiation (Supplementary
information, Fig. S5i ). We did not observe bone marrow formation in
subcapsular grafts generated by PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ or PDGFRA
^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ^(–) cells, suggesting that they are functionally
distinct from growth plate human SSCs that could organize a
hematopoietic microenvironment. ⁵ Taken together, these data suggested
that CADM1 is an important phenotypic marker of eSSPCs, and that PDGFRA
^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells enriched self-renewing eSSPCs that
generate the osteochondral lineages during long bone development, but
fail to reconstitute the bone marrow microenvironment.

Delineating osteogenic lineage specification during calvaria development

To test whether similar skeletal stem/progenitor cells exist in the
embryonic calvarium, we performed scRNA-seq in 8 WPC human calvaria ( n
= 2 embryos from two independent experiments, Supplementary information,
Fig. S6a ). Analysis of 7287 CD235a ^(–) 7AAD ^(–) (live
non-erythrocytes) single cells revealed 12 distinct subsets (Fig. 6a ),
which included: (1) NGFR ⁺ cranial neural crest (NC) cells (cluster 1)
that highly expressed NES ⁷⁷ ; (2) two GJA1 ⁺ subsets including vascular
leptomeningeal cells (cluster 2, VLMCs) that highly expressed SLC6A13
and PTGDS , ⁷⁸ and migratory NC (mig_NC) cells that expressed higher
level of BMP4 (cluster 3) ^(79 , 80) ; (3) neural crest-derived cells
(cluster 4, NCDC) that highly expressed BMP4 and FOXC2 ⁸¹ ; (4) RUNX2 ⁺
osteoprogenitors (cluster 5) that highly expressed osteogenic factors
DLX5 and CLEC11A ^(82 , 83) ; (5) two OSR2 ⁺ PMSC subsets (clusters 6
and 7) that highly expressed POSTN ; (6) SOX9 ⁺ chondrocytes that highly
expressed COL9A2 (cluster 8); (7) PDGFRB ⁺ pericytes that highly
expressed MCAM and ACTA2 ; (8) MYF5 ⁺ myoblasts; (9) CDH5 ⁺ endothelial
cells and (10) CD68 ⁺ macrophages (Fig. 6a, b ; Supplementary
information, Table S1 ). We did not identify Schwann cell population in
8 WPC human calvaria. The only calvarial subset that expressed low
levels of SOX10 , NES , PLP1 and ERBB3 was the myoblast population (data
not shown).

[figure 6]

a UMAP visualization of 12 subsets in 8 WPC calvarial bones ( n = 2
embryos). Inset illustrated the position of calvarial bone. b Violin
plots showing the expression of feature genes for each subset. c Heatmap
showing the transcriptome correlation between osteogenic subsets in
calvarial and OCLC subsets in long bone. Asterisks indicated subsets
with correlation coefficients > 0.8. d Dot plots (left) and UMAP plots
(right) showing the expression of eSSPC marker genes in 12 subsets of 8
WPC calvarial. e UMAP visualization of the two osteogenic trajectories
simulated by Slingshot across NC, mig_NC, NCDC, osteoprogenitor, PMSC1
and PMSC2 subsets (Upper left). Expression UMAP plots of marker genes
(NC, FOXC1 ; Mesoderm, TWIST2 ; Osteoprogenitor, DLX5 ). f Heatmap of
the gene expressions (smoothed over 20 adjacent cells) in subsets
ordered by pseudotime of osteogenesis as in e . Top 200 genes were
selected according to the P values of GVM test and representative genes
were shown. Shared genes in two trajectories were indicated in dashed
box. g Heatmap showing the AUC scores of regulons enriched in the
osteogenic subsets. Z -score (row scaling) was computed. Representative
regulons were shown on the right. h Binary activities of FOXP1/2/4
regulons were shown by UMAP plots.

Full size image []

Fig. 6: Characterization of the osteogenic lineages in human embryonic
calvaria identified neural crest-derived skeletal progenitors.

As compared to 8 WPC long bones, higher proportions of osteoprogenitors
and PMSCs but much lower proportion of chondrocytes were detected in 8
WPC calvarial bones (Supplementary information, Fig. S6b ), highlighting
the fundamental differences between endochondral and intramembranous
ossification. ¹⁵ Spearman correlation analysis showed that calvarial
chondrocyte and osteoprogenitor subsets were more correlated with their
long bone counterparts (Fig. 6c ), while the PMSC2 subset seemed to be
closely related to LBDMC and BMSC subsets in long bones (Fig. 6c ).
Integrated analysis of all subsets at the pseudo-bulk level showed
similar results (Supplementary information, Fig. S6c ). Although no
calvarial subset highly resembled long bone eSSPC at the transcriptome
level, we found that NCDC shared similar phenotypic markers to long bone
eSSPC (PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ ) (Fig. 6d ), which located in
between mig_NC cells and osteoprogenitors (Fig. 6a ). Immunostaining of
8 WPC human calvarial sections showed that PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ cells
localized in the outer layer of sagittal suture (Supplementary
information, Fig. S6d ), reminiscent of PSCs in the adult mouse
calvarium. ⁴

Next, we performed pseudotime analysis within osteogenic subsets by
Slingshot, ⁸⁴ which revealed two distinct differentiation trajectories
(Fig. 6e ). Specifically, the FOXC1 ⁺ NC lineage cells and TWIST2 ⁺
mesodermal lineage cells converge to generate DLX5 ⁺ osteoprogenitors
(Fig. 6e ), where NCDC seemed to play a pivotal role in the transition
from mig_NC cells to osteoprogenitors (Fig. 6e ). Gene expression
analysis showed that NC lineage cells down-regulated neural genes such
as NGFR, NES and CLDN11 ⁸⁵ to generate NCDCs and osteoprogenitors (Fig.
6f ). In contrast, mesodermal lineage cells down-regulated WNT signaling
genes such as WNT2 and WNT2B , as well as TFs like MEOX2 , OSR1 and OSR2
to generate osteoprogenitors (Fig. 6f ). Calvarial osteoprogenitors
highly expressed COL1A1 , PRRX2 and CLEC11A , a recently identified
osteogenic factor that promotes the maintenance of adult skeleton.
^(83 , 86) GSVA analysis showed that EPH-EPHRIN, WNT-LPR6 and RAC1
activation pathways were enriched in NCDCs (Supplementary information,
Fig. S6e ). Similar to long bone eSSPC, SCENIC analysis showed that
FOXP1/2 regulons were highly enriched in NCDC (Fig. 6g, h ;
Supplementary information, Fig. S6f and Table S2 ), although few FOXP1/2
target genes were shared by these two subsets (Fig. 3h ; Supplementary
information, Fig. S6f ). Interestingly, the FOXP4 regulon was also
enriched in NCDC (Fig. 6g, h ), which formed an integrated
transcriptional network with FOXP1/2 (Supplementary information, Fig.
S6f ), suggesting critical roles of FOXP family TFs in NCDC
specification. Taken together, these data revealed two distinct routes
of osteogenic differentiation in calvaria, and identified NCDC as a
potential skeletal stem/progenitor cell subset mediating intramembranous
ossification during human calvarial development.

Discussion

Whereas skeletogenesis has been extensively studied in model organisms
such as mouse, chick and axolotl, ^(39 , 43 , 70 , 87) human studies
largely remain at the histomorphological level. In 2018, Ferguson et al.
interrogated 17 WPC human fetal musculoskeletal subsets by bulk RNA-seq
and compared chondrocyte features among 4 developmental stages. ⁸⁸
Recently, a human skeletal muscle atlas was reported during embryonic,
fetal and postnatal development. ⁸⁹ Here, we provide the first
transcriptional landscape of human embryonic skeletogenesis at
single-cell resolution and shed light on novel skeletal stem/progenitor
cells orchestrating lineage specifications during endochondral and
intramembranous ossification. Together with the previous studies, we are
now approaching a better understanding of the ontogeny of human
musculoskeletal system.

Although the patterning mechanisms during limb bud development have been
well-studied and simulated by different models, ^(15 , 17 , 19) the
heterogeneity of human limb buds has been elusive. We identified 4
mesenchymal and 2 epithelial subsets in 5 WPC human limb buds. By
analyzing Hox gene expression and well-known marker genes, we were able
to align the 4 mesenchymal subsets along PD and AP axes (Fig. 2f, g ).
Importantly, we identified a highly proliferative LBM2 subset at the
distal most mesenchyme, implicating immature mesenchymal progenitors
underlying AER. ^(21 , 65) We also identified an OCP subset with
chondrogenic potential in the core mesenchyme. Unlike mouse limb bud
mesenchymal progenitors (Sox9 ^(–) Pdgfra ^(hi) ) and OCPs (Sox9 ⁺
Pdgfra ^(hi) ), ²² human limb bud OCPs are SOX9 ^(low) PDGFRA ^(hi)
(Fig. 1d ), suggesting that they are less differentiated than mouse
OCPs. Interestingly, the E11.5 mouse limb buds lacked an equivalent LBM2
subset, showed early chondrogenic differentiation of OCP, and contained
fewer proportion of AER cells (Supplementary information, Fig. S2 ).
Together, these data suggested greater potential of human limb bud
outgrowth that could possibly contribute to longer limb bones. Whether
the novel regulons identified in human limb bud OCP (e.g., ZMIZ1 and
KDM5A) critically control osteo-chondrogenic differentiation remains to
be validated by functional studies.

We identified 3 subsets of skeletal stem/progenitor cells in 8 WPC human
long bones, namely, LBDMC, BMSC and eSSPC. The LBDMC expressed marker
genes of limb bud mesenchymal progenitors, and was inferred by
pseudotime analysis to generate BMSCs and eSSPCs (Fig. 3c ). This
suggested that it might be derived from the peripheral limb bud
mesenchyme surrounding the condensed cartilage template. Whether LBDMC
could function as embryonic SSCs that could generate the entire limb
bones or give rise to growth plate SSCs in the fetal stage remain to be
explored by future studies. The BMSC subset highly expressed PDGFRA and
CXCL12 , but not LEPR or ADIPOQ (data not shown), suggesting their
differences with adult mouse BMSCs. ^(6 , 41 , 90) Similar to
perivascular SSCs in the adult human bone marrow, ²⁶ PDGFRA ⁺ cells from
8 WPC human long bones underwent trilineage differentiation in vitro
(Supplementary information, Fig. S4e–h ), which were in sharp contrast
to eSSPCs that only showed osteo-chondrogenic differentiation potential
(Fig. 5b, c ). Considering that eSSPCs mainly localized in the
perichondrial regions of embryonic long bones, these data indicated that
BMSC and eSSPC represent stem/progenitor subsets from different skeletal
compartments, which is consistent with the current notion that skeletal
development and repair is maintained by multiple populations of SSCs. ¹⁰

An equivalent eSSPC subset was also found in E15.5 mouse embryonic long
bones (Supplementary information, Fig. S3 ), suggesting that it is an
evolutionary conserved population. The fact that both human and mouse
eSSPCs were enriched with FOXP1/2 regulons was quite intriguing (Fig. 3i
), since mouse Foxp1/2/4 are highly expressed in perichondrial skeletal
progenitors. ⁷⁵ Foxp1/2/4 regulate endochondral ossification by
interacting with Runx2 to repress its transactivation activity, ⁷⁵ which
partially explain how eSSPCs are maintained in an undifferentiated
state. In contrast to FOXP1/2, the FOXP4 regulon activity was enriched
in the chondroblast subset (Fig. 3f ), suggesting that it is important
for chondrogenesis. Notably, much more FOXP2 target genes were found in
human long bones as compared to mouse (human: 97, mouse: 12), consistent
with the recent discovery that skeletal FOXP2 contributes to the
acquisition of important human traits such as language and bipedalism.
⁹¹ More functional studies are needed to fully address whether FOXP1/2
regulate human eSSPC self-renewal and differentiation, as well as the
underlying molecular mechanisms.

CADM1 was previously identified as an osteoblastic adhesion molecule and
a diagnostic marker for osteosarcoma. ⁹² Here we found that CADM1
enriched eSSPCs in the perichondrium of 8 WPC human long bones. Similar
to human growth plate SSCs, ⁵ eSSPCs exhibit high clonogenic capacity,
which self-renew and undergo osteo-chondrogenic but not adipogenic
differentiation in vitro and in vivo. However, eSSPCs do not form bone
marrow upon renal subcapsular transplantation, probably due to the fact
that they mainly localized in the perichondrium. In contrast to eSSPCs,
PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ^(–) cells only underwent osteogenic
differentiation in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that they might
function as progenitor cells mediating intramembranous ossification in
the perichondrium. ⁹³ We were unable to transplant uncultured eSSPCs due
to limited number of cells we could obtain from 8 WPC human long bones.
Future optimization of the transplantation protocol is needed to further
dissect the in vivo functions of human and mouse eSSPCs. Furthermore,
genetic lineage-tracing studies would help elucidate the relationships
between eSSPCs and postnatal SSCs from the growth plate, periosteum and
perivascular regions in mouse models.

Interestingly, we also identified a NCDC subset in 8 WPC human calvaria
that shared similar phenotypic markers with long bone eSSPC (Fig. 6d ).
Importantly, FOXP1/2/4 regulons were all enriched in calvarial NCDCs,
suggesting fundamental role of FOXP family TFs in regulating
intramembranous ossification. Consistent with this, Foxp1/2 were
detected in skeletal progenitors during mouse craniofacial bone
development, ⁹⁴ while deficiencies of Foxp1/2/4 led to craniofacial
defects. ⁷⁵ Unlike long bone eSSPCs, NCDCs are clearly separated from
chondrocytes at both single-cell (Fig. 6a ) and pseudo-bulk levels
(Supplementary information, Fig. S6c ), which was characteristic of
intramembranous ossification. Future studies are needed to test whether
NCDCs are evolutionarily conserved in mouse embryonic calvarium, and to
prospectively isolate NCDCs for functional analysis of their stem cell
activities. Furthermore, the relationships between embryonic NCDCs and
calvarial PSCs in postnatal mice could be addressed by genetic
lineage-tracing studies. ⁴

Taken together, the human skeletal stem/progenitor cells and
skeletogenic mechanisms we uncovered here might help develop novel cell
therapies to promote bone and cartilage regeneration, which could treat
skeletal disorders such as non-union fracture, osteoporosis and
craniofacial defects.

Materials and methods

Human embryonic sample collection

Healthy human embryonic samples were obtained with elective medical
termination of pregnancy in the Academy of Military Medical Sciences
(the Fifth Medical Center of the PLA General Hospital). All human
studies were conducted in accordance with the official ethical
guidelines and protocols approved by the Ethics Committee of the
Affiliated Hospital of Academy of Military Medical Sciences
(ky-2017-3-5). The written informed consents were obtained from donors
before embryo collection by elective medical termination of pregnancy.
Donors with chronic, infectious, genetic diseases or abnormal pregnancy
were excluded in this study. Morphological examinations were performed
carefully under the stereoscope for each embryo, and CNVs were evaluated
using scRNA-seq data to confirm normal karyotypes (see details below).
Days post fertilization of embryos were determined according to the
measurement of crown-rump length (CRL) and number of somite pairs, and
staged into 5 and 8 WPC. ⁹⁵ The gender of embryos used for scRNA-seq was
identified based on the expression of XIST (female) and RPS4Y1 (male).
⁹⁶ Sample information was summarized in Supplementary information, Figs.
S1a and S6a . The morphology of the embryonic limb bud and long bone was
assessed by Hematoxylin-Eosin Staining Kit (Fig. 1a ).

Mice

NOG (NOD.Cg-Prkdc ^(scid) Il2rg ^(tm1Sug) /JicCrl) immunodeficient mice
(Beijing Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd.) were used
as recipients for renal subcapsular transplantation of human eSSPCs. All
procedures and protocols were approved by the Ethics Committee of the
Academy of Military Medical Sciences (the Fifth Medical Center of the
PLA General Hospital).

Preparation of single-cell suspensions from human limb buds and long bones

Human embryonic limb buds were isolated and transferred to IMDM medium
(Gibco) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (HyClone) on ice. The
tissues were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and transferred
to pre-warmed digestion medium containing 0.1 g/mL Collagenase I (Sigma)
and 0.1 g/mL Collagenase II (Sigma). After vigorous shaking, the samples
were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min with gentle shaking every 5 min.
Digestion was terminated by adding IMDM medium containing 10% FBS. After
centrifugation at 350× g for 6 min, collected cells were resuspended in
FACS sorting buffer (1× PBS with 1% BSA) for subsequent staining. For
long bone specimens, forelimbs and hindlimbs were dissected to obtain
humeri, ulnae, radii, femurs, tibiae and fibulae after removing skeletal
muscles and connective tissues. For calvarial bone specimens, frontal
bones, parietal bones and occipital bones were dissected. All procedures
were performed on ice. Whole bones, including the
perichondrium/periosteum and bone marrow, were cut into small pieces by
scissors and then subjected to enzymatic digestion as described above.
The digested tissues were then ground by a syringe plunger and filtrated
with 40 μm strainer to remove cartilage or bone chips, after which cells
were centrifugated and resuspended in FACS sorting buffer. The viability
of cells was 80%–90% by trypan blue staining (0.4%) and 70%–80% by 7-AAD
staining.

Flow cytometry

The following antibodies were used: CD45-APC-Cy7 (BD, 557833, 1:50),
CD31-Biotin (eBioscience, 13-0319-82, 1:50), Steptavidin-APC-eFlour780
(eBioscience, 47-4317-82, 1:100), CD235a-APC-Cy7 (Biolegend, 349116,
1:50), CD140a-BB515 (BD, 564594, 1:50), PDPN-APC (eBioscience,
17-9381-41, 1:50) and CADM1-PE (MBL, CM004-5, 1:50). Cells were stained
in sorting buffer (PBS + 1% BSA) for 30 min at 4 °C, washed once and
resuspended in sorting buffer with 7-AAD (eBioscience, 00-6993-50, 1:50)
as live cell dye. Flow cytometry was performed on BD FACS Aria II.
Pre-gating was first done for live cells based on 7-AAD staining. Gating
strategies were based on Fluorescence Minus One (FMO) controls. FlowJo
v10 software was used for analyzing the flow cytometry data.

CFU-F culture and mesenchymal sphere assay

For CFU-F cultures, sorted cells were seeded in 6-well plate (4.5 × 10 ³
cells/well) containing culture medium (α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS,
1% Penicillin/Streptomycin solution and 1 ng/mL bFGF) and incubated at
37 °C with 5% CO ₂ . Half of the medium was changed every 3–4 days. At
day 10, cells were fixed and stained with crystal violet staining
solution. Adherent colonies with more than 50 cells were quantified.
Serial CFU-F colony formation was performed by seeding sorted cells in
culture medium at clonal density, and serially passaged to generate the
secondary and tertiary colonies. For mesenchymal sphere assay, 4.5 × 10
³ sorted cells were plated in a 6-well ultra-low adherent dish with
culture medium and left undisturbed for a week. ⁷³ Half of the medium
was changed every week, and the spheres were quantified at day 10.

Adipogenic, osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation assays

For nonclonal adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation, sorted cells
were cultured for 10 days and replated at a density of 2.0 × 10 ⁴ /cm ²
. Adipogenic differentiation was performed in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented
with 10% FBS, 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin, 0.5 μM isobutylmethylxanthine
(Sigma), 60 μM indomethacin (Sigma, 17378), 5 μg/mL insulin (Sigma) and
1 μM dexamethasone (Sigma, D2915) for 1 week (medium was changed every 3
days), and quantified by oil red O staining (Sigma) and qPCR. Osteogenic
differentiation was performed in osteogenic medium (Cyagen, GUXMX-90021)
for 3 weeks (medium was changed every 3 days) and quantified by alizarin
red S staining (Sigma) and qPCR. The osteogenic differentiation medium
contained α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin,
1% glutamine, 50 μg/mL L -ascorbate acid, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate and
100 nM dexamethasone. For nonclonal chondrogenic differentiation,
2.5 × 10 ⁵ cultured cells were centrifugated at 1100 rpm in 15 mL
polypropylene conical tubes to form pellets and cultured in chondrogenic
medium for 3–4 weeks (medium was changed every 3 days). The chondrogenic
medium contained high glucose DMEM (Corning) supplemented with 10 ng/mL
TGFβ3 (Peprotech), 100 nM dexamethasone (Sigma), 50 μg/mL ascorbic
acid-2-phosphate (Sigma), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco), 40 μg/mL proline
(Sigma) and 1× ITS cell culture supplement (Cyagen) containing
6.25 μg/mL bovine insulin, 6.25 μg/mL transferrin, 6.25 μg/mL selenous
acid, 5.33 μg/mL linoleic acid and 1.25 mg/mL BSA. Chondrogenic
differentiation was quantified by cryosection of the cell pellets
followed by toluidine blue staining and qPCR. For clonal trilineage
differentiation, single cells were flow cytometrically sorted into
96-well plates to form single CFU-F colonies. Clonally expanded cells
were split into three parts and allowed to differentiate in osteogenic,
adipogenic and chondrogenic mediums as described above. Clonal
chondrogenic differentiation was also validated by alcian blue and
safranin O staining.

RNA extraction and qPCR

Total RNA was extracted from cells using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was prepared using
Transgene Reverse Transcription Kit (Transgene). qPCR reactions were
prepared using SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystem) and run on a
7500 Real-Time PCR Systems (Applied Biosystems). A list of the primers
used was provided in Supplementary information, Table S5 . Human GADPH
was used as loading control and the relative mRNA abundance was
calculated using a comparative CT method.

Renal subcapsular transplantation

PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ⁺ and PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ^(–)
cells were sorted by flow cytometry and cultured for 7–10 days as
previously described. ⁹⁷ Briefly, 5 × 10 ⁵ cells were resuspended in
5 μL of Matrigel (BD) on ice and then aspirated into a micropipette
(Drummond Scientific, 5-000-2010). A small incision was made near the
kidney pole to separate the capsule from the renal parenchyma. Matrigel
with cells was injected into the kidney pocket. Eight weeks after
transplantation, grafts were dissected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
at 4 °C for 12 h, decalcified in 10% EDTA at room temperature for 3 days
and then dehydrated in 30% sucrose at 4 °C overnight. Grafts were then
cryosectioned at 10 μm and stained by Movat Pentachrome Staining Kit
(ScyTek, MPS-1) to demonstrate bone and cartilage differentiation.
Immunostaining of collagen I and II were also performed on adjacent
sections (see below).

Immunofluorescent staining

Slides containing renal subcapsular graft cryosections were blocked (10%
horse serum and 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS) at room temperature for 1 h
and stained with anti-collagen I (Abcam, ab34710, 1:500) and
anti-collagen II (Abcam, ab185430, 1:500) antibodies at 4 °C overnight.
After washing in PBS (3 × 10 min), anti-Rabbit Alexa Fluor 555
(Invitrogen, A31572, 1:500) and anti-Mouse Alexa Fluor 647 (Invitrogen,
A31571, 1:500) secondary antibodies were incubated for 1 h at room
temperature. After washing in PBS (3 × 10 min), slides were mounted with
ProLong™ Gold Antifade Mountant with DAPI (Invitrogen, P36931). For long
bone and calvarial staining, the following antibodies were used:
anti-PDPN (eBioscience, 17-9381-41, 1:50), anti-CADM1 (abcam, ab3910,
1:100), anti-FOXP1 (Sigma-Aldrich, ABE68, 1:100), anti-FOXP2 (Abcam,
ab16046, 1:200), anti-Rabbit Alexa Fluor 555 (Invitrogen, A31572,1:500)
and anti-Rat Alexa Fluor 647 (Invitrogen, A21472, 1:500). Images were
acquired with Olympus fluorescence inverted microscope (IX73) and
analyzed by ImageJ software.

scRNA-seq

Samples from different stages were harvested and live cells were sorted
based on 7-AAD staining (90%–95% viability after sorting). Cells were
resuspended at 1 × 10 ³ cells/mL and loaded on Chromium Controller to
obtain single cells (10× Genomics). For scRNA-seq library construction,
Chromium Single cell 3’ Library and Gel Bead Kit V2 (10× Genomics,
PN120237) was used to generate single cell gel beads in emulsion (GEM).
The captured cells were lysed, and the released RNA was
reverse-transcribed with primers containing poly-T, barcode, unique
molecular Identifiers (UMIs) and read 1 primer sequence in GEMs.
Barcoded cDNA was purified and amplified by PCR. The adapter ligation
reaction was performed to add sample index and read 2 primer sequence.
After quality control, the libraries were sequenced on Illumina Hiseq X
Ten platform in 150 bp pair-ended manner (Berry Genomics Corporation,
Beijing, China).

Processing of scRNA-seq data

Sequencing data from 10× Genomics were processed with CellRanger
(version 3.0.1) for demultiplexing, barcode processing and single-cell
3′ gene counting. Human genome reference (GRCh38) was used for sequence
alignment. Only confidently mapped, non-PCR duplicates with valid
barcodes and UMIs were used to generate the gene-barcode matrix. For
quality control, only cells with more than 1000 genes and less than 10%
of mitochondrial gene were retained for downstream analysis. Cell
doublets were removed using Scrublet software implemented in python ⁹⁸ (
https://github.com/AllonKleinLab/scrublet ). Briefly, we computed
doublet score for each cell by applying Scrublet function to each 10×
dataset. Then we estimated the number of expected doublets ( N ) with
multiplet rates (based on the number of cells recovered) provided by 10×
Genomics guideline. Top N of cells ranked by doublet scores were
determined as doublets (Supplementary information, Figs. S1a and S6a ).
To correct batch effects among different samples, we applied CCA method
implemented in Seurat for dataset integration. ⁴⁵ The union of the top
2000 genes with the highest dispersion for each dataset was taken to
identify anchors using the FindIntegrationAnchors function and calculate
30 dimensionalities. We then applied IntegrateData function to generate
integrated expression matrix, which was used for dimensionality
reduction and clustering subsequently. To exclude karyotype
abnormalities in human embryos, we applied CNV estimation for single
cells in 10× datasets from a previous study. ⁴⁴ Briefly, we downloaded
the expression matrix of non-malignant cells (T cells) and malignant
cells as reference cells for the estimation of CNVs. We sampled 100
cells for each 10× dataset and combined them with reference cells to
calculate initial CNVs and final CNVs. The CNV correlation score of each
single-cell was computed and visualized by heatmap (Supplementary
information, Fig. S1b ).

Dimensionality reduction and clustering

To reduce the variation in cell proliferation status that might
interfere with single cell analysis, we used the previously reported
G1/S and G2/M phase-specific genes to compute scores of S phase and G2M
phase, as well as estimate cell cycle status. ⁹⁹ We scaled the
integrated data with regressing the S.Score and G2M.Score , and
calculated the top 30 PCs. For dimensionality reduction, we performed
UMAP on whole datasets, and used Diffusion map and PCA to visualize the
subset of datasets (Supplementary information, Table S3 ). t-Distributed
Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) was applied to visualize the
relationships between cell clusters at pseudo-bulk level. For
clustering, improved graph-based clustering of the integrated dataset
was performed using louvain algorithm after constructing the Shared
Nearest Neighbor (SNN) graph. The resolution parameters were set to 0.2
(Supplementary information, Table S3 ). To ensure the robustness of
clustering, we randomly subsampled 1000 cells from each dataset, and
re-processed as previous steps and parameters. The newly identified
clusters showed an average assignment of 80% to clusters identified in
the whole dataset.

Species comparative analysis

For comparative analysis between human and mouse datasets, the
expression data matrix of mouse E11.5 and E15.5 from GSE142425 were
collected. ⁷⁰ To ensure the comparability, the stage correspondences
were identified ¹⁰⁰ and the mouse datasets were processed by the same
steps as human datasets, including dimension reduction and clustering.
SciBet R package (version 1.0) ⁷¹ was used to compare cell subsets
identified in limb buds and long bones. We used the expression matrix of
human cells as reference dataset and calculated the mean expression
values of marker genes across cells with identical cell types.
Multinomial models were then built and the query mouse dataset were
re-annotated. Sankey plot with ggalluvial R package was applied to
visualize the matching degree of predicted mouse cell type to the human
reference.

Differential expression analysis

Non-parametric Wilcoxon rank sum test was performed to find DEGs among
individual clusters. DEGs were filtered by fold change of more than 2
and cell fraction of more than 20%. DEGs with P value adjusted by
Benjamini–Hochberg less than 0.01 were considered to be significant
(Supplementary information, Table S1 ).

Single-cell regulatory network analysis

The analysis of single-cell gene regulatory network was performed using
the SCENIC package. ⁶⁴ A standard pipeline implemented in R can be found
in https://github.com/aertslab/SCENIC . The expression matrix was loaded
onto GENIE3 for building the initial co-expression gene regulatory
networks (GRN). The regulon data was then analyzed using the RcisTarget
package to create TF motifs using hg19-tss-centered-10kb (for human) and
mm9-tss-centered-10kb (for mouse) database. The regulon activity scores
were calculated with AUC by the AUCell package. Significant regulons
enriched in different clusters were calculated by two-sided unpaired t
-test implemented in Limma R package (version 3.38.3) (Supplementary
information, Table S2 ). The mean regulon activity scores for each
cluster were calculated and visualized by heatmap. Predicted target
genes of regulon were ranked by Genie3Weight value and filtered by
normalized enrichment score (NES) of binding motifs (greater than 3).
The transcriptional network of TF and predicted target genes was
visualized by Cytoscape (version 3.6). Edges indicated the Genie3Weights
and Node size indicated the number of motifs.

Reconstructing single-cell trajectory

Single-cell trajectory was analyzed by R package Slingshot (version
1.0.0), which infers trajectory by fitting principal curves based on
given cell embeddings. ⁸⁴ After specifying the start or end cluster of
the trajectory, cells were projected onto the curve to assign their
developmental pseudotime. Specifically, we computed the diffusion map
embeddings of LBDMCs, eSSPCs, osteoprogenitors and two subsets of
chondrocytes to infer osteo-chondrogenic trajectory. The diffusion
components 1 and 3 were used as the input to Slingshot (Fig. 3d ), and
LBDMC was set as start cluster. For calvarial osteogenesis trajectory,
we re-computed the UMAP embedding of NCs, mig_NCs, NCDCs,
osteoprogenitors and two subsets of PMSCs, and used UMAP component 1 and
2 as the input to Slingshot . The osteoprogenitor subset was set as end
cluster (Fig. 6e ). To investigate temporally expressed genes changing
in a continuous manner over pseudotime, GAM function implemented in gam
R package was used to find pattern genes along the trajectories. For
identification of major patterns, top 200 genes with the most
significant time-dependent model fit were retained, and expressions of
these genes were smoothed over 20 adjacent cells. To quantify the
connectivity of clusters within single-cell graph, the PAGA method
implemented in Scanpy (version 1.4.3) ¹⁰¹ was used to generate the
abstracted graph.

RNA velocity

RNA velocity ⁵⁸ was used for pseudo-time analysis in the integrated
dataset of limb buds and long bones (Fig. 1f ), as well as OCLC subsets
(Fig. 3c ). The spliced and un-spliced reads were quantified by the
velocyto (version 0.17.11) python package with human genome reference.
The output loom file was analyzed for velocities of each gene following
the pipeline of scvelo python package (version 0.1.25). ¹⁰² Count matrix
was filtered by top 2000 highly variable genes and first- and
second-order moments were computed for each cell with nearest neighbor
set to 30.

TACS

We adopted TACS as previously described to evaluate cell distribution
along selected query genes. ⁷⁶ For each cell, average expression of the
top 100 correlated genes was set as the expression score of the query
gene. Stat_density2d function implemented in ggplot2 package was used
for visualization. Threshold for partitioning was set to zero.

Gene functional annotation analysis

GO enrichment analysis was performed for DEGs using clusterProfiler
package. ¹⁰³ The significant DEGs were used as input to compareCluster
function and ontology was set to the BP (biological process). The P
values of enriched GO terms were adjusted by Benjamini-Hochberg method
and terms were filtered by setting pvalueCutoff to 0.05. Simplify
function was performed to remove redundancy of the enriched GO terms.

Gene set analysis

GSVA was performed using the GSVA R package (version 1.30.0). ¹⁰⁴ We
selected gene sets of curated signaling pathways from the MSigDB
Database (v7.0, https://www.gsea-msigdb.org ) to identify pathways
enriched in different limb mesenchymal subsets. The gene-by-cell matrix
was converted to gene-set-by-cell matrix and GSVA scores were computed
for gene sets with a minimum of 5 detected genes. Significant pathways
enriched in different clusters were calculated by two-sided unpaired t
-test implemented in Limma R package (version 3.38.3).

Surface markers and TFs

Surface marker and TF lists were downloaded from the in silico human
surfaceome ( http://wlab.ethz.ch/surfaceome/ ) ¹⁰⁵ and HumanTFDB3.0 (
http://bioinfo.life.hust.edu.cn/HumanTFDB/ ) database websites
(Supplementary information, Table S4 ).

Statistics and reproducibility

Values in scatter plots were presented as means ± SEM. Statistical
analyses were performed using R and SPSS. The statistical significance
of differences was determined using one-way ANOVA with LSD multiple
comparison tests (Fig. 4e ; Supplementary information, Fig. S4d ).
Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to determine the statistical
significance of differences for gene expression (2 ^(–ΔΔCt) ) analyses
(Fig. 5c ; Supplementary information, Figs. S4h and S5f, h ). For
scRNA-seq experiments, we analyzed three independent embryos for limb
buds (5 WPC), three independent embryos for long bones (8 WPC), two
independent embryos for calvaria (8 WPC), and one embryo for eSSPC
phenotypic marker validation (Supplementary information, Fig. S5a–c ).
For functional experiments, we analyzed two independent embryos for H&E
staining and immunostaining (Figs. 1 a, 3 i, j, 4b ; Supplementary
information, Figs. S4b , S6d ), three independent embryos for CFU-F
colony and sphere formation analyses (Fig. 4c–e ; Supplementary
information, Fig. S4c, d ), two independent embryos for PDGFRA ⁺ cell
colony formation analysis (Supplementary information, Fig. S4e, f ),
three independent clones for clonal differentiation analyses (Fig. 5a–c
; Supplementary information, Fig. S5g, h ), three independent embryos
for nonclonal differentiation analyses (Supplementary information, Fig.
S5e, f ), three independent embryos for renal subcapsular
transplantation of eSSPCs (Fig. 5d ), and one embryo for renal
subcapsular transplantation of PDGFRA ^(low/–) PDPN ⁺ CADM1 ^(–) cells
(Supplementary information, Fig. S5i ).

Data availability

The accession number for the human scRNA-seq data reported in this paper
is GEO: GSE143753. All other relevant data are available from the
corresponding authors upon request. The accession number for the count
matrices of mouse datasets used in this paper is GSE142425. ⁷⁰

References

1.  Chan, C. K. et al. Identification and specification of the mouse
    skeletal stem cell. Cell 160 , 285–298 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

2.  Worthley, D. L. et al. Gremlin 1 identifies a skeletal stem cell
    with bone, cartilage, and reticular stromal potential. Cell 160 ,
    269–284 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

3.  Mizuhashi, K. et al. Resting zone of the growth plate houses a
    unique class of skeletal stem cells. Nature 563 , 254–258 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

4.  Debnath, S. et al. Discovery of a periosteal stem cell mediating
    intramembranous bone formation. Nature 562 , 133–139 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

5.  Chan, C. K. F. et al. Identification of the human skeletal stem
    cell. Cell 175 , 43–56 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

6.  Zhou, B. O., Yue, R., Murphy, M. M., Peyer, J. G. & Morrison, S. J.
    Leptin-receptor-expressing mesenchymal stromal cells represent the
    main source of bone formed by adult bone marrow. Cell Stem Cell 15 ,
    154–168 (2014).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

7.  Yue, R., Zhou, B. O., Shimada, I. S., Zhao, Z. & Morrison, S. J.
    Leptin receptor promotes adipogenesis and reduces osteogenesis by
    regulating mesenchymal stromal cells in adult bone marrow. Cell Stem
    Cell 18 , 782–796 (2016).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

8.  Bianco, P. & Robey, P. G. Skeletal stem cells. Development 142 ,
    1023–1027 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

9.  Robey, P. G., Kuznetsov, S. A., Riminucci, M. & Bianco, P. Skeletal
    (“mesenchymal”) stem cells for tissue engineering. Methods Mol. Med.
    140 , 83–99 (2007).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

10. Matsushita, Y., Ono, W. & Ono, N. Skeletal stem cells for bone
    development and repair: diversity matters. Curr. Osteoporos. Rep. 18
    , 189–198 (2020).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

11. Ambrosi, T. H., Longaker, M. T. & Chan, C. K. F. A revised
    perspective of skeletal stem cell biology. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 7
    , 189 (2019).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

12. Maes, C. et al. Osteoblast precursors, but not mature osteoblasts,
    move into developing and fractured bones along with invading blood
    vessels. Dev. Cell 19 , 329–344 (2010).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

13. Ono, N., Ono, W., Nagasawa, T. & Kronenberg, H. M. A subset of
    chondrogenic cells provides early mesenchymal progenitors in growing
    bones. Nat. Cell Biol. 16 , 1157–1167 (2014).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

14. Ono, N. et al. Vasculature-associated cells expressing nestin in
    developing bones encompass early cells in the osteoblast and
    endothelial lineage. Dev. Cell 29 , 330–339 (2014).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

15. Lefebvre, V. & Bhattaram, P. Vertebrate skeletogenesis. Curr. Top.
    Dev. Biol. 90 , 291–317 (2010).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

16. Zeller, R., Lopez-Rios, J. & Zuniga, A. Vertebrate limb bud
    development: moving towards integrative analysis of organogenesis.
    Nat. Rev. Genet. 10 , 845–858 (2009).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

17. Tarchini, B., Duboule, D. & Kmita, M. Regulatory constraints in the
    evolution of the tetrapod limb anterior-posterior polarity. Nature
    443 , 985–988 (2006).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

18. Mariani, F. V., Ahn, C. P. & Martin, G. R. Genetic evidence that
    FGFs have an instructive role in limb proximal-distal patterning.
    Nature 453 , 401–405 (2008).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

19. Dudley, A. T., Ros, M. A. & Tabin, C. J. A re-examination of
    proximodistal patterning during vertebrate limb development. Nature
    418 , 539–544 (2002).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

20. Niswander, L., Tickle, C., Vogel, A., Booth, I. & Martin, G. R.
    FGF-4 replaces the apical ectodermal ridge and directs outgrowth and
    patterning of the limb. Cell 75 , 579–587 (1993).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

21. Kawakami, Y. et al. WNT signals control FGF-dependent limb
    initiation and AER induction in the chick embryo. Cell 104 , 891–900
    (2001).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

22. Reinhardt, R. et al. Molecular signatures identify immature
    mesenchymal progenitors in early mouse limb buds that respond
    differentially to morphogen signaling. Development 146 , dev173328
    (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

23. Pearse, R. V. 2nd, Scherz, P. J., Campbell, J. K. & Tabin, C. J. A
    cellular lineage analysis of the chick limb bud. Dev. Biol . 310 ,
    388–400 (2007).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

24. Kronenberg, H. M. Developmental regulation of the growth plate.
    Nature 423 , 332–336 (2003).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

25. Calvi, L. M. et al. Osteoblastic cells regulate the haematopoietic
    stem cell niche. Nature 425 , 841–846 (2003).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

26. Sacchetti, B. et al. Self-renewing osteoprogenitors in bone marrow
    sinusoids can organize a hematopoietic microenvironment. Cell 131 ,
    324–336 (2007).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

27. Ding, L., Saunders, T. L., Enikolopov, G. & Morrison, S. J.
    Endothelial and perivascular cells maintain haematopoietic stem
    cells. Nature 481 , 457–462 (2012).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

28. Sugiyama, T., Kohara, H., Noda, M. & Nagasawa, T. Maintenance of the
    hematopoietic stem cell pool by CXCL12-CXCR4 chemokine signaling in
    bone marrow stromal cell niches. Immunity 25 , 977–988 (2006).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

29. Chan, C. K. et al. Endochondral ossification is required for
    haematopoietic stem-cell niche formation. Nature 457 , 490–494
    (2009).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

30. Opperman, L. A. Cranial sutures as intramembranous bone growth
    sites. Dev. Dyn. 219 , 472–485 (2000).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

31. Hall, B. K. & Miyake, T. The membranous skeleton: the role of cell
    condensations in vertebrate skeletogenesis. Anat. Embryol. 186 ,
    107–124 (1992).

    Article CAS Google Scholar

32. Holmbeck, K. et al. MT1-MMP-deficient mice develop dwarfism,
    osteopenia, arthritis, and connective tissue disease due to
    inadequate collagen turnover. Cell 99 , 81–92 (1999).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

33. Holmbeck, K., Bianco, P., Chrysovergis, K., Yamada, S. &
    Birkedal-Hansen, H. MT1-MMP-dependent, apoptotic remodeling of
    unmineralized cartilage: a critical process in skeletal growth. J.
    Cell Biol. 163 , 661–671 (2003).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

34. Chai, Y. et al. Fate of the mammalian cranial neural crest during
    tooth and mandibular morphogenesis. Development 127 , 1671–1679
    (2000).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

35. Quarto, N. et al. Origin matters: differences in embryonic tissue
    origin and Wnt signaling determine the osteogenic potential and
    healing capacity of frontal and parietal calvarial bones. J. Bone
    Miner. Res. 25 , 1680–1694 (2010).

    CAS PubMed Google Scholar

36. Zeng, Y. et al. Tracing the first hematopoietic stem cell generation
    in human embryo by single-cell RNA sequencing. Cell Res. 29 ,
    881–894 (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

37. Kolodziejczyk, A. A., Kim, J. K., Svensson, V., Marioni, J. C. &
    Teichmann, S. A. The technology and biology of single-cell RNA
    sequencing. Mol. Cell 58 , 610–620 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

38. Bian, Z. et al. Deciphering human macrophage development at
    single-cell resolution. Nature 528 , 571–576 (2020).

    Article Google Scholar

39. Cao, J. et al. The single-cell transcriptional landscape of
    mammalian organogenesis. Nature 566 , 496–502 (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

40. Tikhonova, A. N. et al. The bone marrow microenvironment at
    single-cell resolution. Nature 569 , 222–228 (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

41. Baryawno, N. et al. A cellular taxonomy of the bone marrow stroma in
    homeostasis and leukemia. Cell 177 , 1915–1932 (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

42. Wolock, S. L. et al. Mapping distinct bone marrow niche populations
    and their differentiation paths. Cell Rep. 28 , 302–311 (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

43. Gerber, T. et al. Single-cell analysis uncovers convergence of cell
    identities during axolotl limb regeneration. Science 362 , eaaq0681
    (2018).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

44. Ma, L. et al. Tumor cell biodiversity drives microenvironmental
    reprogramming in liver cancer. Cancer Cell 36 , 418–430 (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

45. Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R.
    Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across different
    conditions, technologies, and species. Nat. Biotechnol. 36 , 411–420
    (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

46. Rousseeuw, P. Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and
    validation of cluster analysis. J. Comput. Appl. Math. 20 , 53–65
    (1987).

    Article Google Scholar

47. Litvinov, S. V., Velders, M. P., Bakker, H. A., Fleuren, G. J. &
    Warnaar, S. O. Ep-CAM: a human epithelial antigen is a homophilic
    cell-cell adhesion molecule. J. Cell. Biol. 125 , 437–446 (1994).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

48. Paul, R. W. & Lee, P. W. Glycophorin is the reovirus receptor on
    human erythrocytes. Virology 159 , 94–101 (1987).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

49. Buckingham, M. & Rigby, P. W. Gene regulatory networks and
    transcriptional mechanisms that control myogenesis. Dev. Cell 28 ,
    225–238 (2014).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

50. Breier, G. et al. Molecular cloning and expression of murine
    vascular endothelial-cadherin in early stage development of
    cardiovascular system. Blood 87 , 630–641 (1996).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

51. Holness, C. L. & Simmons, D. L. Molecular cloning of CD68, a human
    macrophage marker related to lysosomal glycoproteins. Blood 81 ,
    1607–1613 (1993).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

52. Komori, T. et al. Targeted disruption of Cbfa1 results in a complete
    lack of bone formation owing to maturational arrest of osteoblasts.
    Cell 89 , 755–764 (1997).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

53. Kocialkowski, S., Yeger, H., Kingdom, J., Perbal, B. &
    Schofield, P. N. Expression of the human NOV gene in first trimester
    fetal tissues. Anat. Embryol. 203 , 417–427 (2001).

    Article CAS Google Scholar

54. Kawai, S., Michikami, I., Kitagaki, J., Hashino, E. & Amano, A.
    Expression pattern of zinc-finger transcription factor Odd-skipped
    related 2 in murine development and neonatal stage. Gene Expr.
    Patterns 13 , 372–376 (2013).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

55. Bi, W., Deng, J. M., Zhang, Z., Behringer, R. R. & de
    Crombrugghe, B. Sox9 is required for cartilage formation. Nat.
    Genet. 22 , 85–89 (1999).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

56. Hasty, P. et al. Muscle deficiency and neonatal death in mice with a
    targeted mutation in the myogenin gene. Nature 364 , 501–506 (1993).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

57. Finzsch, M. et al. Sox10 is required for Schwann cell identity and
    progression beyond the immature Schwann cell stage. J. Cell Biol.
    189 , 701–712 (2010).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

58. La Manno, G. et al. RNA velocity of single cells. Nature 560 ,
    494–498 (2018).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

59. Wolf, F. A. et al. PAGA: graph abstraction reconciles clustering
    with trajectory inference through a topology preserving map of
    single cells. Genome Biol . 20 , 59 (2019).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

60. Summerbell, D., Lewis, J. H. & Wolpert, L. Positional information in
    chick limb morphogenesis. Nature 244 , 492–496 (1973).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

61. Mallo, M. Reassessing the role of hox genes during vertebrate
    development and evolution. Trends Genet . 34 , 209–217 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

62. Mercader, N. et al. Opposing RA and FGF signals control
    proximodistal vertebrate limb development through regulation of Meis
    genes. Development 127 , 3961–3970 (2000).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

63. Tickle, C., Alberts, B., Wolpert, L. & Lee, J. Local application of
    retinoic acid to the limb bond mimics the action of the polarizing
    region. Nature 296 , 564–566 (1982).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

64. Aibar, S. et al. SCENIC: single-cell regulatory network inference
    and clustering. Nat. Methods 14 , 1083–1086 (2017).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

65. Pizette, S., Abate-Shen, C. & Niswander, L. BMP controls
    proximodistal outgrowth, via induction of the apical ectodermal
    ridge, and dorsoventral patterning in the vertebrate limb.
    Development 128 , 4463–4474 (2001).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

66. Marcil, A., Dumontier, E., Chamberland, M., Camper, S. A. &
    Drouin, J. Pitx1 and Pitx2 are required for development of hindlimb
    buds. Development 130 , 45–55 (2003).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

67. Selleri, L. et al. Requirement for Pbx1 in skeletal patterning and
    programming chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation.
    Development 128 , 3543–3557 (2001).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

68. Carapito, R. et al. ZMIZ1 variants cause a syndromic
    neurodevelopmental disorder. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 104 , 319–330
    (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

69. Wang, C. et al. KDM5A controls bone morphogenic protein 2-induced
    osteogenic differentiation of bone mesenchymal stem cells during
    osteoporosis. Cell Death Dis. 7 , e2335 (2016).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

70. Kelly, N. H., Huynh, N. P. T. & Guilak, F. Single cell
    RNA-sequencing reveals cellular heterogeneity and trajectories of
    lineage specification during murine embryonic limb development.
    Matrix Biol. 89 , 1–10 (2020).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

71. Li, C. et al. SciBet as a portable and fast single cell type
    identifier. Nat. Commun. 11 , 1818 (2020).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

72. Fernandez-Teran, M. A., Hinchliffe, J. R. & Ros, M. A. Birth and
    death of cells in limb development: a mapping study. Dev. Dyn. 235 ,
    2521–2537 (2006).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

73. Pinho, S. et al. PDGFRalpha and CD51 mark human nestin+
    sphere-forming mesenchymal stem cells capable of hematopoietic
    progenitor cell expansion. J. Exp. Med. 210 , 1351–1367 (2013).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

74. Bialek, P. et al. A twist code determines the onset of osteoblast
    differentiation. Dev. Cell 6 , 423–435 (2004).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

75. Zhao, H. et al. Foxp1/2/4 regulate endochondral ossification as a
    suppresser complex. Dev. Biol. 398 , 242–254 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

76. Kernfeld, E. M. et al. A single-cell transcriptomic atlas of thymus
    organogenesis resolves cell types and developmental maturation.
    Immunity 48 , 1258–1270 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

77. Achilleos, A. & Trainor, P. A. Neural crest stem cells: discovery,
    properties and potential for therapy. Cell Res. 22 , 288–304 (2012).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

78. Zeisel, A. et al. Molecular architecture of the mouse nervous
    system. Cell 174 , 999–1014 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

79. Huang, G. Y. et al. Gap junction-mediated cell-cell communication
    modulates mouse neural crest migration. J. Cell. Biol. 143 ,
    1725–1734 (1998).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

80. Jourdeuil, K. & Taneyhill, L. A. The gap junction protein connexin
    43 controls multiple aspects of cranial neural crest cell
    development. J. Cell Sci. 133 , 4 (2020).

    Google Scholar

81. Rice, R., Rice, D. P., Olsen, B. R. & Thesleff, I. Progression of
    calvarial bone development requires Foxc1 regulation of Msx2 and
    Alx4. Dev. Biol. 262 , 75–87 (2003).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

82. Ryoo, H. M. et al. Stage-specific expression of Dlx-5 during
    osteoblast differentiation: involvement in regulation of osteocalcin
    gene expression. Mol. Endocrinol . 11 , 1681–1694 (1997).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

83. Yue, R., Shen, B. & Morrison, S. J. Clec11a/osteolectin is an
    osteogenic growth factor that promotes the maintenance of the adult
    skeleton. Elife 5 , e18782 (2016).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

84. Street, K. et al. Slingshot: cell lineage and pseudotime inference
    for single-cell transcriptomics. BMC Genom. 19 , 477 (2018).

    Article Google Scholar

85. Cahoy, J. D. et al. A transcriptome database for astrocytes,
    neurons, and oligodendrocytes: a new resource for understanding
    brain development and function. J. Neurosci. 28 , 264–278 (2008).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

86. Shen, B. et al. Integrin alpha11 is an Osteolectin receptor and is
    required for the maintenance of adult skeletal bone mass. Elife 8 ,
    e42274 (2019).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

87. Feregrino, C., Sacher, F., Parnas, O. & Tschopp, P. A single-cell
    transcriptomic atlas of the developing chicken limb. BMC Genom. 20 ,
    401 (2019).

    Article Google Scholar

88. Ferguson, G. B. et al. Mapping molecular landmarks of human skeletal
    ontogeny and pluripotent stem cell-derived articular chondrocytes.
    Nat. Commun. 9 , 3634 (2018).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

89. Xi, H. et al. A human skeletal muscle atlas identifies the
    trajectories of stem and progenitor cells across development and
    from human pluripotent stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 27 , 158–176
    (2020).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

90. Matsushita, Y. et al. A Wnt-mediated transformation of the bone
    marrow stromal cell identity orchestrates skeletal regeneration.
    Nat. Commun. 11 , 332 (2020).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

91. Xu, S. et al. Foxp2 regulates anatomical features that may be
    relevant for vocal behaviors and bipedal locomotion. Proc. Natl
    Acad. Sci. USA 115 , 8799–8804 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

92. Inoue, T. et al. Cell adhesion molecule 1 is a new osteoblastic cell
    adhesion molecule and a diagnostic marker for osteosarcoma. Life
    Sci. 92 , 91–99 (2013).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

93. Kronenberg, H. M. The role of the perichondrium in fetal bone
    development. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 1116 , 59–64 (2007).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

94. Cesario, J. M., Almaidhan, A. A. & Jeong, J. Expression of forkhead
    box transcription factor genes Foxp1 and Foxp2 during jaw
    development. Gene Expr. Patterns 20 , 111–119 (2016).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

95. Moore, K. L., Persaud, T. V. N. & Torchia, M. G. The Developing
    Human E-Book: Clinically Oriented Embryology With STUDENT CONSULT
    Online Access (Elsevier Health Sciences, 2011).

96. Staedtler, F. et al. Robust and tissue-independent gender-specific
    transcript biomarkers. Biomarkers 18 , 436–445 (2013).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

97. Gulati, G. S. et al. Isolation and functional assessment of mouse
    skeletal stem cell lineage. Nat. Protoc. 13 , 1294–1309 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

98. Wolock, S. L., Lopez, R. & Klein, A. M. Scrublet: computational
    identification of cell doublets in single-cell transcriptomic data.
    Cell Syst. 8 , 281–291 (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

99. Tirosh, I. et al. Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of
    metastatic melanoma by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 352 , 189–196
    (2016).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

100. Butler, H. & Juurlink, B. H. J. An Atlas for Staging Mammalian and
     Chick Embryos (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1987).

101. Wolf, F. A., Angerer, P. & Theis, F. J. SCANPY: large-scale
     single-cell gene expression data analysis. Genome Biol. 19 , 15
     (2018).

     Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

102. Bergen, V., Lange, M., Peidli, S., Wolf, F. A. & Theis, F. J.
     Generalizing RNA velocity to transient cell states through
     dynamical modeling. Nat. Biotechnol. 38 , 1408–1414 (2020).

     Article PubMed Google Scholar

103. Yu, G., Wang, L. G., Han, Y. & He, Q. Y. clusterProfiler: an R
     package for comparing biological themes among gene clusters. OMICS
     16 , 284–287 (2012).

     Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

104. Hanzelmann, S., Castelo, R. & Guinney, J. GSVA: gene set variation
     analysis for microarray and RNA-seq data. BMC Bioinform. 14 , 7
     (2013).

     Article Google Scholar

105. Bausch-Fluck, D. et al. The in silico human surfaceome. Proc. Natl
     Acad. Sci. USA 115 , 10988–10997 (2018).

     Article Google Scholar

Download references []

Acknowledgements

This study was supported by grants from the National Key R&D Program of
China (2017YFA0106400, 2017YFA0103401, 2016YFA0100601 and
2019YFA0110201), the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(31425012, 31871173, 31930054, 81772389, 81800102, 81890991, 81900115,
82070108, 91749124 and 81871771), the Fundamental Research Funds for the
Central Universities (22120190149, 22120200411, kx0200020173386), the
Program for Guangdong Introducing Innovative and Entrepreneurial Teams
(2017ZT07S347), the Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission
(Z171100000417009), the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (7182123),
the State Key Laboratory of Proteomics (SKLP-K201502) and the Key R&D
Program of Guangdong Province (2019B020234002).

Author information

Author notes

1.  These authors contributed equally: Jian He, Jing Yan, Jianfang Wang,
    Liangyu Zhao, Qian Xin

Authors and Affiliations

1.  State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Academy of Military Medical
    Sciences, Academy of Military Sciences, Beijing, 100071, China

    Jian He, Jing Yan, Qian Xin, Zhijie Bai, Yunqiao Li, Han He & Bing
    Liu

2.  Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Shanghai East Hospital,
    Shanghai Key Laboratory of Signaling and Disease Research, Frontier
    Science Center for Stem Cell Research, School of Life Sciences and
    Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, 200092, China

    Jianfang Wang & Rui Yue

3.  Department of Orthopedics, Changzheng Hospital, Naval Medical
    University, Shanghai, 200003, China

    Liangyu Zhao

4.  State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Fifth Medical
    Center of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, 100071, China

    Yang Zeng, Zongcheng Li, Yanli Ni, Yandong Gong & Bing Liu

5.  Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital, Tongji
    University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200072, China

    Yuxi Sun

6.  Department of Transfusion, Daping Hospital, Army Military Medical
    University, Chongqing, 400042, China

    Han Zhang

7.  Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
    University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450052, China

    Zhilei Bian

8.  Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry of Education,
    Institute of Hematology, School of Medicine, Jinan University,
    Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510632, China

    Yu Lan & Bing Liu

9.  Guangzhou Regenerative Medicine and Health-Guangdong Laboratory
    (GRMH-GDL), Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510530, China

    Yu Lan

10. Department of Gynecology, Fifth Medical Center of Chinese PLA
    General Hospital, Beijing, 100071, China

    Chunyu Ma & Lihong Bian

11. Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, 100850, China

    Heng Zhu

Authors

1.   Jian He
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
2.   Jing Yan
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
3.   Jianfang Wang
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
4.   Liangyu Zhao
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
5.   Qian Xin
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
6.   Yang Zeng
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
7.   Yuxi Sun
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
8.   Han Zhang
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
9.   Zhijie Bai
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
10.  Zongcheng Li
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
11.  Yanli Ni
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
12.  Yandong Gong
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
13.  Yunqiao Li
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
14.  Han He
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
15.  Zhilei Bian
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
16.  Yu Lan
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
17.  Chunyu Ma
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
18.  Lihong Bian
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
19.  Heng Zhu
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
20.  Bing Liu
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
21.  Rui Yue
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar

Contributions

R.Y., B.L., and H. Zhu designed and supervised the study; J.Y., Q.X.,
and H. Zhang performed the sample collections and preparations with help
from Z. Bai, C.M., and L.B.; Q.X. and Y.Z. performed flow cytometry
analyses with the help of Y.N., Z. Bian, and Y. Li; J.W., J.Y., and L.Z.
performed functional experiments with the help of Y.S., J.H., and L.Z.;
J.Y. and L.Z. performed scRNA-seq. J.H. performed bioinformatic analyses
with the help of Z.L., Y.G., H.H., and Y. Lan; R.Y., J.H., J.Y., J.W.,
and L.Z. wrote the manuscript.

Corresponding authors

Correspondence to Heng Zhu , Bing Liu or Rui Yue .

Ethics declarations

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplementary information

Supplementary information, Figure S1

Supplementary information, Figure S2

Supplementary information, Figure S3

Supplementary information, Figure S4

Supplementary information, Figure S5

Supplementary information, Figure S6

Supplementary information, Table S1

Supplementary information, Table S2

Supplementary information, Table S3

Supplementary information, Table S4

Supplementary information, Table S5

Rights and permissions

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use
is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .

Reprints and permissions

About this article

[Check for updates. Verify currency and authenticity via CrossMark]

Cite this article

He, J., Yan, J., Wang, J. et al. Dissecting human embryonic skeletal
stem cell ontogeny by single-cell transcriptomic and functional
analyses. Cell Res 31 , 742–757 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-021-00467-z

Download citation []

-   Received : 30 July 2020

-   Accepted : 22 December 2020

-   Published : 20 January 2021

-   Issue Date : July 2021

-   DOI : https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-021-00467-z

Share this article

Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this
content:

Get shareable link

Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.

Copy to clipboard

Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative

Subjects

-   Mesenchymal stem cells
-   Transcriptomics

This article is cited by

-   Nerve growth factor receptor limits inflammation to promote remodeling and repair of osteoarthritic joints

    -   Lan Zhao
    -   Yumei Lai
    -   Jian Huang

    Nature Communications (2024)

-   Gli1 labels progenitors during chondrogenesis in postnatal mice

    -   Boer Li
    -   Puying Yang
    -   Ling Ye

    EMBO Reports (2024)

-   Cellular transitions during cranial suture establishment in zebrafish

    -   D’Juan T. Farmer
    -   Jennifer E. Dukov
    -   J. Gage Crump

    Nature Communications (2024)

-   Evaluation of Potential Roles of Zinc Finger Homeobox 3 (Zfhx3) Expressed in Chondrocytes and Osteoblasts on Skeletal Growth in Mice

    -   Gustavo A. Gomez
    -   Anakha Udayakumar
    -   Subburaman Mohan

    Calcified Tissue International (2024)

-   The emerging studies on mesenchymal progenitors in the long bone

    -   Fangyuan Shen
    -   Xiaobin Huang
    -   Yu Shi

    Cell & Bioscience (2023)
