Main

An atlas of human white adipose tissue

Mature adipocytes are too large and fragile to withstand traditional
single-cell approaches. As a result, several groups have focused on the
non-adipocyte stromal-vascular fraction (SVF) of mouse ^(3 , 4 , 5 , 6)
and human ⁷ adipose tissue. An alternative strategy involves
single-nucleus sequencing (sNuc-seq), which can capture adipocytes, and
has been used to describe mouse white ^(8 , 9) and human brown adipose
tissue ¹⁰ . To compare these approaches in the context of human white
adipose tissue (WAT), we pursued experiments on two cohorts of subjects.
In the first, we collected subcutaneous WAT from nine women, isolated
single cells from the SVF using collagenase digestion, and then
performed whole-cell Drop-seq (hereafter referred to as single-cell RNA
sequencing (scRNA-seq)). Because different depots have been
differentially linked to metabolic disease ¹¹ , for the second cohort we
collected paired subcutaneous (SAT) and visceral (VAT) adipose tissue
from ten individuals and SAT alone from three additional individuals
(ten women and three men), and performed sNuc-seq (Fig. 1a, b , Extended
Data Table 1 ). Doublet and low-quality filtering left 166,149 total
cells (28,465 single cells and 137,684 single nuclei). The data from
both approaches were integrated, enabling the identification of the
canonical cell types found in WAT, including adipocytes, adipose stem
and progenitor cells (ASPCs), vascular cells and immune cells (Fig. 1c,
d , Supplementary Table 1 ). As expected, adipocytes were found only in
the sNuc-seq dataset. The sNuc-seq data were also enriched for vascular
cells and macrophages, probably because collagenase digestion did not
fully dissociate these cell types. Mesothelial cells were not detected
in the scRNA-seq dataset, which did not include visceral tissue. Some of
the visceral samples included cells that appeared to be endometrial in
origin ( PRLR +), probably owing to endometriosis. Overall proportions
of adipocytes and ASPCs did not differ between depots, but depot clearly
affects the distribution of cells within these populations (Extended
Data Fig. 1a, b , Extended Data Table 2 , Supplementary Fig. 1 ). In our
limited cohort, we could not detect major effects of body mass index
(BMI) on cell-type proportions. To assess this finding at larger scale,
we used our dataset as a reference to estimate cell-type proportions in
bulk RNA-sequencing data ¹² obtained from the SAT of 331 men in the
METSIM cohort ¹³ . This deconvolution analysis showed that the relative
abundance of adipocytes in that cohort was negatively correlated with
BMI, whereas ASPCs and myeloid cells were positively correlated
(Extended Data Fig. 1c ).

[figure 1]

a , Schematic of workflows for scRNA-seq and sNuc-seq of human WAT. b ,
Graphical representation of the cohorts for both studies. Only the
sNuc-seq cohort contains VAT. c , Uniform manifold approximation and
projection (UMAP) projection of all 166,129 sequenced human cells split
by cohort. d , Marker genes for each cell population in the human WAT
dataset. e , Schematic of workflow for sNuc-seq of mouse ING and PG
adipose tissue. f , UMAP projection of all 197,721 sequenced mouse cells
split by diet. g , Marker genes for each cell population in the mouse
WAT dataset.

Full size image []

Fig. 1: A single-cell atlas of human white adipose tissue.

An atlas of mouse white adipose tissue

Mouse models are commonly used to study adipose tissue biology ¹⁴ . We
thus sought to compare mouse and human WAT at the single-cell level by
performing sNuc-seq on inguinal adipose tissue (ING) (corresponding to
human SAT) and perigonadal adipose tissue (PG) (epididymal (EPI) in
males and periovarian (POV) in females, corresponding to human VAT) of
mice fed either a chow or high-fat diet (HFD) for 13 weeks (Fig. 2a, b
). After doublet removal and quality filtering, we considered a total of
197,721 cells (106,469 from PG and 91,252 from ING), identifying all
cell types observed in human WAT (Fig. 2c, d , Supplementary Table 2 )
with the addition of distinct male and female epithelial populations (
Dcdc2a + and Erbb4 +, respectively). The female population is largely
found in ING samples and resembles mammary epithelial cells, whereas the
male population is almost exclusively found in PG samples, and as noted
by others ⁹ may represent contaminants from the epididymis and other
reproductive structures that are tightly apposed to fat ¹⁵ . In contrast
to the human data, cell-type abundance in mouse WAT is highly dependent
on body weight, with relatively little variation between depots (Fig. 2c
, Extended Data Fig. 2a, b , Extended Data Table 2 ). The proportions of
cell types in mouse adipose tissue after HFD were notably different
between male and female mice, which might reflect a true sex difference
or may reflect higher weight gain in males (Extended Data Fig. 2b ). To
compare across species, we used a reference mapping algorithm to assign
each mouse cell to a human cluster and noted a high degree of overall
similarity between annotated mouse clusters and mapped human clusters
(Extended Data Fig. 2c ).

[figure 2]

a , Schematic of workflow for sNuc-seq of mouse ING and PG adipose
tissue. b , Body weight of chow and high-fat fed animals used for
sNuc-seq (n = 5 chow and 5 HFD male mice, 2 chow and 2 HFD female mice).
Error bars represent standard error of the mean (SEM). c , UMAP
projection of all 197,721 sequenced mouse cells split by diet. d ,
Marker genes for each cell population in the mouse WAT dataset.

Source data

Full size image []

Fig. 2: A single cell atlas of mouse white adipose tissue.

Vascular cells

Subclustering of human vascular cells revealed expected cell types,
including blood endothelial clusters that represent arteriolar, stalk
and venular cells, as well as lymphatic endothelial cells, pericytes and
smooth muscle cells (Extended Data Fig. 3a, b ). Mouse vascular cells
formed similar clusters (Extended Data Fig. 3c, d ). As expected,
reference mapping demonstrated high similarity between human and mouse
vascular subclusters (Extended Data Fig. 3e ) and proportions of
subclusters were similar across species (Extended Data Fig. 3f, g ).

Immune cells

Analysis of human immune cells from scRNA-seq and sNuc-seq samples again
revealed expected cell types, including multiple subpopulations of
monocytes, macrophages ( CD14 +), dendritic cells, B and T lymphocytes,
and natural killer (NK) cells ( CD96 +), mast cells ( CPA3 +), and
neutrophils ( CSF3R +) (Extended Data Fig. 4a, b ). Monocyte
subpopulations 1 and 2 resemble classical and non-classical monocytes
and DC subpopulations 1 and 2 resemble previously reported CLEC9A + and
CD1C + populations from blood, respectively ¹⁶ . Lymphocytes also
resemble previously reported B cell, T cell and NK cell populations from
human WAT, including CTLA4 + human regulatory T cells ¹⁷ . Examination
of the mouse WAT immune compartment revealed most of the same cell
types, although there were notable differences in the relative abundance
of myeloid and lymphoid cells between species (Extended Data Fig. 4c, d
). Human WAT contains somewhat fewer T and NK cells than macrophages or
monocytes (approximately 30% versus 60% of recovered immune cells); this
imbalance was greatly exaggerated in mouse WAT (macrophages were
approximately 90% of recovered immune cells versus 3% T and NK cells).
Because a wealth of data supports a key role for macrophages and
monocytes in adipose biology ^(18 , 19) , we separated these cell types
from other immune cells in silico for subsequent analysis. Mouse
clusters of non-monocytes and non-macrophages mapped relatively well to
their human counterparts, with some mixing of T and NK populations
(Extended Data Fig. 4e ). Macrophages and monocytes also mapped well to
their general class, but this association often broke down when
considering macrophage subpopulations (Extended Data Fig. 4f ).

The proportion of immune cell populations was similar in human SAT and
VAT, with a few exceptions (Extended Data Fig. 5a, e ). In mice, small
depot-dependent differences were eclipsed by relatively huge shifts in
response to diet in male mice (Extended Data Fig. 5b, d, f ). Most
notably, HFD resulted in a massive increase in macrophage numbers,
primarily in PG, consistent with a large body of prior data ^(18 , 20)
(Extended Data Figs. 2 b, 5f ). Reductions in the proportion of most
other immune cell types (for example, NK cells, T and B lymphocytes,
dendritic cells and neutrophils) are probably due to the large increase
in macrophages, rather than to intrinsic loss of those specific cell
types following HFD (Extended Data Fig. 5b, d, f ). Mast cells increase
proportionally after HFD, as previously reported ²¹ (Extended Data Fig.
5f ).

Accumulation of adipose tissue macrophages in obesity has also been
shown in human WAT, using a combination of histomorphometry and flow
sorting ^(19 , 22) . Our data generally support this conclusion,
although the magnitude of the effect is substantially less prominent
than that seen in mouse WAT (Extended Data Fig. 1b , 5c, e, f ). The
largest change involves the hMac3 cluster, which is induced in visceral
fat with higher BMI (Extended Data Fig. 5c, e ).

Mesothelial cells

Subclustering of mesothelial cells revealed three populations in both
human VAT and mouse PG (Extended Data Fig. 6a–d ). When mouse
mesothelial clusters were mapped to human clusters, cells were split
between human clusters hMes1 and hMes2, with no cells mapping to hMes3
(Extended Data Fig. 6e ). The proportions of most mesothelial
subpopulations did not vary with obesity or HFD, with the exception of
hMes1 and hMes2, which were reduced and increased in higher BMIs,
respectively (Extended Data Fig. 6f, g ).

ASPCs

We identified six distinct subpopulations of human ASPCs (see
Supplementary Note 1 ) in subclustered scRNA-seq and sNuc-seq samples,
all of which express the common marker gene PDGFRA (Extended Data Fig.
7a, b ). Similarly, we noted six subpopulations in the mouse ASPC data,
all of which were also Pdgfra+ and some of which correspond well with a
particular human subpopulation (Extended Data Fig. 7c–e ). For example,
mASPC2 and hASPC2 are characterized by high expression of Aldh1a3 and
ALDH1A3 , respectively, and strongly resemble previously identified
early multipotent progenitor cells that reside in the reticular
interstitium of the fat pad ⁵ . Similarly, mASPC4 and hASPC4 express
Epha3 and EPHA3 , respectively, and probably represent the
anti-adipogenic ‘adipogenesis-regulatory’ cells (Aregs) population
reported by Schwalie et al. ³ . Seeking to better place our mouse ASPC
data into the overall context of the published literature, we integrated
our data with those reported by others ^(3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 9) and found
that ASPC populations identified by individual studies were generally
preserved after integration, suggesting robustness of these clusters.
Specifically, the previously described Icam1 + committed progenitor,
Dpp4 + early progenitor and Cd142 + Areg populations ²³ cluster together
across studies (Extended Data Fig. 7f ).

Many human and mouse ASPC subclusters showed dependency on diet, depot
or both. hASPC1, hASPC4 and hASPC5 were more prevalent in SAT than VAT,
with increases in SAT hASPC4 and hASPC5 proportion in subjects with
higher BMI (Extended Data Fig. 8a, c, e ). Conversely, hASPC3 and hASPC6
were more prevalent in VAT. In male mice, early progenitor cells
(mASPC2) were notably more abundant in ING than PG and mASPC5 and mASPC6
were more prevalent in EPI versus ING, although this varied with obesity
(Extended Data Fig. 8b, d, f ). Many of these observations are
consistent with previous findings. For example, HFD has been shown to
increase adipogenesis specifically in PG in mice ^(24 , 25) . Our data
indicate that pre-adipocyte subclusters such as mASPC6 increase markedly
in response to HFD in PG only. The loss of early progenitors (mASPC2) in
PG with HFD is consistent with conversion of these cells along the
differentiative pathway, that is, towards mASPC6 (Extended Data Fig. 8b,
d, f ).

Unique populations of human adipocytes

White adipocytes are generally considered to be monotypic and
essentially uniform in function, although some recent studies have begun
to challenge this assumption ^(8 , 9 , 10 , 26) . The high resolution of
our data enabled us to find that human white adipocytes cluster into
seven subpopulations with distinct markers (Fig. 3a, b ). We noted
strong depot-specific associations of adipocyte subtypes, with hAd1,
hAd3, hAd4 and hAd7 localized primarily to SAT, whereas hAd2 and hAd6
were almost exclusively found in VAT. hAd5 represents a smaller
population that is roughly equally distributed between SAT and VAT
(Extended Data Fig. 9a–c ). We also noted a BMI-dependent shift in
adipocyte subtype within both depots (Extended Data Fig. 9b, c ).
Notably, all adipocyte subpopulations are present in the majority of
subjects, indicating that these subtype designations are generalizable
and do not reflect sample-specific variation (Extended Data Fig. 9c ).
Immunohistochemistry and/or immunofluorescence of markers for hAd4,
hAd5, hAd6 and hAd7 in human SAT or VAT identified specific
subpopulations of adipocytes at proportions similar to those seen in the
single-cell data (Fig. 3c , Extended Data Fig. 9d, e ). To examine
whether SAT subtype proportion was influenced by BMI in a larger
dataset, we estimated individual subtype proportions by deconvolution
analysis of bulk RNA-seq data from purified isolated subcutaneous human
adipocytes from 43 women (Fig. 3d ). This analysis showed that clusters
hAd4 and hAd7 trend to negative correlation with BMI, aligning with our
immunohistochemistry findings, whereas hAd5 proportion is positively
correlated with BMI. Visceral adipocytes are absent from this dataset
and so we were unable to assess the prevalence of hAd2 or hAd6 in this
cohort, although immunohistochemistry of the hAd6 marker EBF2 also
suggests that its prevalence may be positively correlated with BMI (Fig.
3c ).

[figure 3]

a , UMAP projection of clusters formed by 25,871 human white adipocytes.
b , Expression of adipocyte marker ADIPOQ and specific marker genes for
each adipocyte subpopulation. c , Immunohistochemistry for marker genes
of adipocyte subpopulations hAd4, hAd5, hAd6, and hAd7 in human adipose
tissue and percentage of positive adipocytes per slide in lean and obese
individuals (GRIA4: 5 lean, 5 obese, 2 slides each; PGAP1: 5 lean SAT, 4
obese SAT, 3 lean VAT, 4 obese VAT, 1 slide each; EBF2: 3 lean, 4 obese,
2 slides each; AGMO: 4 lean, 4 obese, 2 slides each). Scale bars: 25 μm
for GRIA4, EBF2 and AGMO, 20 μm for PGAP1. d , Estimated proportions of
adipocyte subpopulations in bulk RNA sequencing data of enzymatically
isolated subcutaneous adipocytes from 43 individuals plotted against
BMI. P values were calculated using an F -test (with null hypothesis
that slope is zero), error bars represent a confidence level of 0.95. e
, Representative images of ex vivo differentiated human subcutaneous
adipocytes predicted to have low or high hAd3 content on the basis of
deconvolution of bulk RNA sequencing data. Green represents BODIPY
staining, blue represents Hoechst staining. Scale bars, 100 μm. f ,
Normalized count of BODIPY-related features in ex vivo differentiated
adipocytes stratified into hAd3-low and hAd3-high populations. Points
represent normalized feature for cultures derived from individual
subjects. n = 8 hAd3-low SAT, 4 hAd3-high SAT, 19 hAd3-low VAT,
4 hAd3-high VAT. g , UMAP projection of 39,934 mouse white adipocytes. h
, Expression of Adipoq and marker genes for each mouse adipocyte
subpopulation. In bar graphs, error bars represent s.e.m. and P values
were calculated using two tailed t -tests with no correction for
multiple comparisons.

Source data

Full size image []

Fig. 3: Subclustering of human and mouse adipocytes reveals multiple
distinct populations that vary across depot and diet.

A critical question is whether individual adipocyte subpopulations have
specific functions. To assess this, we first looked at genes that
participate in the major metabolic activities of adipocytes. All
subpopulations expressed these genes, although their relative amounts
differed. Thus, the adipokines adiponectin and adipsin (encoded by CFD )
are most highly expressed in hAd3, and genes encoding insulin signalling
components such as INSR , IRS1 and IRS2 are most highly expressed in
hAd5 (Extended Data Fig. 9f ). We next examined the data more
holistically by performing pathway analysis for markers of each
subpopulation (Extended Data Fig. 9g–m , Supplementary Table 3 ). The
subpopulations hAd1 (which accounts for around 40% of SAT adipocyte
nuclei) and hAd2 (which accounts for ~60% of VAT adipocyte nuclei) have
relatively few specific markers, and the pathways that emerged were
similarly generic (Extended Data Fig. 9g, h ). These populations
probably represent ‘basal’ subcutaneous or visceral adipocytes, so we
therefore focused on subpopulations hAd3–hAd7 for more detailed
analysis. hAd3 was associated with ‘triglyceride biosynthesis’ and
included higher expression of DGAT2 , SREBF1 and PNPLA3 (Extended Data
Fig. 9i ). The hAd4 cluster expresses the highest amounts of several
fatty acid desaturases, including ELOVL5 and FADS3 (Extended Data Fig.
9j ), which is particularly interesting in light of the
insulin-sensitizing role of unsaturated lipokines such as palmitoleate
²⁷ . hAd5 adipocytes, besides having the highest expression of several
insulin signaling genes, were also characterized by expression of
‘sphingolipid signalling genes’ (Extended Data Fig. 9k ). Both hAd3 and
hAd4 exhibit high expression of lipogenic genes, whereas lipolytic gene
expression is higher in hAd5 (Extended Data Fig. 9f ).

We next investigated whether cultured human adipocytes retain evidence
of subpopulation diversity. To this end, we used 57 RNA-seq datasets
from human subcutaneous and visceral adipocyte progenitors
differentiated ex vivo over a 14-day timecourse ²⁸ . Deconvolution
analysis revealed that many subpopulations identified in vivo were
retained in culture. Furthermore, much of the previously noted depot
selectivity was recapitulated, such that the visceral subpopulations
hAd2 and hAd6 were more likely to appear in cultured visceral cells and
the subcutaneous subpopulation hAd4 was overrepresented in cultured
subcutaneous cells (Extended Data Fig. 10a ). Furthermore, because these
cultured samples were also subjected to high-content image-based
profiling using LipocyteProfiler ²⁸ , we were able to correlate
individual subpopulations with image-based features representing
morphological and cellular phenotypes including lipid and mitochondrial
content. Thus, ex vivo differentiated adipocyte cultures predicted to
have high amounts of hAd3—associated with high lipogenic gene expression
and lower lipolytic gene expression—have more overall lipid and larger
lipid droplets (Fig. 3e, f ). Conversely, ex vivo differentiated
adipocyte cultures with high predicted hAd5 content have less overall
lipid and smaller lipid droplets, consistent with a higher ratio of
lipolytic to lipogenic gene expression (Extended Data Fig. 10b–d ).

One particularly notable adipocyte subpopulation is hAd6, which
selectively expresses genes typically associated with thermogenesis,
such as EBF2 , ESRRG and PPARGC1A (Extended Data Fig. 9l ), a surprising
finding given that this population is almost exclusively visceral (Fig.
3c , Extended Data Fig. 9a, c ). To better understand the relationship
between this subpopulation and visceral adiposity, we looked further
into the hAd6 marker EBF2, which has previously been identified as a
pro-thermogenic transcription factor ²⁹ . Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) at the EBF2 locus are associated with waist–hip
ratio (WHR) ³⁰ , which could involve actions in either SAT or VAT.
However, a recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) of loci
associated with adiposity in specific depots ³¹ found a common variant
15 kb upstream of EBF2 associated specifically with VAT (Extended Data
Fig. 11a ). Further analysis revealed that the minor allele of this SNP
(minor allele frequency = 0.23) was associated with VAT adjusted for BMI
and height (VATadj) (beta = 0.062 s.d. per allele, P = 1.0 × 10 ⁻¹² ),
but not adjusted abdominal subcutaneous (ASAT) (ASATadj:
beta = −0.018 s.d. per allele, P = 0.03) or gluteofemoral (GFAT)
(GFATadj: beta = −0.020 s.d. per allele, P = 0.02, Extended Data Fig.
11b ) depots. We additionally stratified individuals into either 0, 1 or
2 carriers of the minor allele and observed an additive trend (G/G
median VATadj −0.10 s.d., G/A median VATadj = −0.04 s.d., A/A median
VATadj 0.04 s.d.; Extended Data Fig. 11c ). Next, we returned to the
visceral human adipocytes differentiated ex vivo, and found that samples
predicted to have a higher proportion of hAd6 adipocytes were
characterized by higher mitochondrial intensity and increased expression
of mitochondrial and thermogenic genes (Extended Data Fig. 11d–f ).
Finally, our analysis of hAd6 markers suggested other pathways
associated with thermogenesis, including one for ‘axon guidance’
(Extended Data Fig. 11g ). We could not measure innervation directly
using our data, because the nuclei of innervating sympathetic neurons
are located in the spinal ganglia and not the fat depot itself.
Nonetheless, we estimated the degree of innervation using the presence
of neuron-specific gene expression in the ambient RNA of our visceral
sNuc-seq samples. Indeed, the amount of pan-neuronal markers like TUBB3
and UCHL1 ³² strongly correlate with hAd6 proportion (Extended Data Fig.
11h ), further supporting a role for hAd6 as a novel visceral adipocyte
subtype with thermogenic potential.

Mouse adipocyte subpopulations

Subclustering mouse adipocytes revealed six subpopulations (Fig. 3g, h
). Unlike human adipocytes, mouse adipocyte subtypes exhibit little
depot enrichment (Extended Data Fig. 12a–c ). There was strong diet
dependency, however, as relative proportions of mAd1 and mAd3 were
reduced after HFD, while the opposite was noted for mAd4 and mAd5
(Extended Data Fig. 12b, c ). In contrast to the relatively good
cross-species concordance between immune cells, vascular cells, and
ASPCs, mouse adipocytes do not map cleanly onto human adipocyte
subpopulations (Extended Data Fig. 12d–f ).

As in humans, genes associated with major adipocyte functions showed
some subpopulation selectivity in mice. For example, lipogenesis genes
were highest in HFD-induced population mAd5 (Extended Data Fig. 12c, g
). More detailed pathway analysis on mouse adipocyte subpopulations
(Supplementary Table 3 ) showed that the chow-associated clusters
mAd1–mAd3 were notably enriched in metabolic pathways, particularly
those involved in lipid handling (Extended Data Fig. 12h–j ). By
contrast, the HFD-associated clusters mAd4–mAd6 were linked to pathways
such as ‘HIF-1 signalling’, ‘actin cytoskeleton’ and ‘NF-kB signalling’
(Extended Data Fig. 12k–n ), consistent with the known roles of hypoxia,
cytoskeletal remodelling and inflammation in HFD-induced adipose
dysfunction and insulin resistance ^(23 , 24 , 25) .

Our data allow us to address the question of whether diet-induced
changes in gene expression at the population level are shared among
subpopulations or whether they reflect a change in the relative
proportion of these subpopulations. To assess this, we examined the 20
most positively and negatively regulated genes from a translating
ribosome affinity purification (TRAP)-based RNA-seq experiment in white
adipocytes from mice fed chow or HFD ³³ (Supplementary Fig. 2a ). We
noted that some genes (for example, Cyp2e1 and Fam13a ) exhibit elevated
expression in chow adipocytes in almost all subpopulations, whereas for
others (for example, Cfd ), expression is largely driven by the mAd3
population which decreases in abundance with HFD (Extended Data Fig.
12b, c , Supplementary Fig. 2b ). Similarly, Sept9 , Cdkn1a and Fgf13
show increased gene expression after HFD across almost all
subpopulations, whereas other HFD-induced genes (for example, Slc5a7 and
Dclk1 ) increase their expression after HFD in the chow-associated
clusters mAd1–mAd4 but not in the HFD-associated clusters mAd5–mAd7
(Supplementary Fig. 2b ). Thus, diet-dependent expression changes
reflect both alterations across all clusters and the emergence or
disappearance of distinct populations.

Finally, we could not identify a mouse adipocyte population that could
be clearly delineated as thermogenic. Such cells have been noted by
others in WAT, even at room temperature ³⁴ . However, when we considered
the adipocytes from chow-fed mice independently, mAd1 split into three
clusters (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b ). Two of these clusters, mAd1B and
mAd1C, were recognizable as thermogenic beige adipocytes, with
relatively high expression of Prdm16 and Ppargc1a in mAd1B and even
higher expression of these genes, as well as expression of Ucp1 and
Cidea in mAd1C (Supplementary Fig. 3c ). As expected, the thermogenic
mAd1B and mAd1C subpopulations were enriched in ING versus PG samples
(Supplementary Fig. 3d, e ).

Cell–cell interactions in adipose tissue

The functions of WAT are coordinated by neural and hormonal cues from
outside the fat pad ³⁵ . There is growing appreciation, however, that
intercellular communication within the depot is also critical for the
WAT response to overnutrition and other stressors ³⁶ . In particular,
attention has focused on cross-talk between adipocytes and immune cells
(especially macrophages) in the context of obesity ³⁷ . To assess
potential interactions between all identified cell types in different
depots and at different body mass, we used CellPhoneDB ³⁸ , which uses
the expression of ligand-receptor pairs as a proxy for intercellular
communication (Supplementary Tables 4 , 5 ). As expected, we detected
increased potential communication between human adipocytes and
macrophages in high-BMI versus low-BMI subjects; of 84 potential
interactions identified between human adipocytes and macrophages, 40
(48%) were specific for high-BMI subjects, and only 3 (4%) were specific
for low-BMI subjects (Fig. 4a , Extended Data Fig. 13a, d ). Notably,
obesity was also associated with robustly increased expression of genes
encoding ligand–receptor pairs between adipocytes and many non-immune
cell types, including blood and lymphatic endothelial cells, vascular
SMCs, pericytes and ASPCs (Fig. 4a, b , Extended Data Fig. 13a, d ). For
example, out of 145 potential interactions identified between human
adipocytes and endothelial cells, 65 (45%) were specific for high-BMI
subjects, and only 6 (4%) were specific for low-BMI subjects (Extended
Data Fig. 13d ). Potential interactions between these cell types are
frequently bidirectional, and receptors are often expressed on multiple
cell types, suggesting networks of communication (Fig. 4b , Extended
Data Fig. 13e ). We also noted differential expression of ligands and
receptors within human adipocyte subpopulations, lending further support
to the idea that they carry out distinct functions (Extended Data Fig.
13b ). The specific interactions upregulated during obesity suggest that
adipocytes have a significant role in obesity-related adipose tissue
remodelling. For example, adipocyte expression of angiogenic factors
such as JAG1 and VEGFC is increased in the obese state, as is the
expression of their receptors (for example, NOTCH3 and KDR ) on
endothelial cells, consistent with obesity-associated induction of
angiogenesis by adipocytes ³⁹ (Fig. 4b , Supplementary Table 6 ).

[figure 4]

a , Heat map showing number of significant interactions identified
between cell types in VAT of low-BMI (<30) and high-BMI (>40)
individuals as determined by CellphoneDB. b , Selected interactions
between adipocytes and ASPCs, endothelial cells, and macrophages
identified using CellphoneDB; orange and green indicate interactions
that are significant only with BMI > 40 and only with BMI > 30,
respectively. c , CELLECT P values of the association between cell types
in the human adipose sNuc-seq dataset with GWAS studies. The grey line
represents P = 0.05 and the orange line represents significant P value
after Bonferroni adjustment ( P = 0.003), based on number of cell types
queried. Both T2D and WHR were BMI-adjusted. TG, triglyceride. d ,
CELLECT P values for adipocyte subpopulations. The grey line represents
P = 0.05 and the orange line represents significant P value after
Bonferroni adjustment ( P = 0.001), based on all cell subtypes queried.
e , Estimated cell type proportion of hAd7 in bulk RNA-seq data of
enzymatically isolated subcutaneous adipocytes from 43 individuals
plotted against HOMA-IR. For line of best fit, R ² = 0.11, the error
band represents a confidence level of 0.95. f , g , Expression of hAd7
marker genes negatively correlated with HOMA-IR in human adipocyte
subpopulations ( f ) and bulk RNA-sequencing data of human adipocytes (
g ). In scatter plots, P values were calculated using an F -test with
the null hypothesis that the slope is zero.

Full size image []

Fig. 4: Extensive cell–cell interactions in WAT and associations with
human disease traits.

Analysis of the mouse data yielded similar results, as HFD increased the
intensity of ligand–receptor pair expression, with the most prominent
interactions again occurring between non-immune cell types, especially
between ASPCs and adipocytes, pericytes and SMCs (Extended Data Fig. 13c
). Of note, adipose niche interactions were only moderately conserved
between mouse and human (Extended Data Fig. 13d ). Interactions between
WAT cell types include several that have been studied, such as the
effect of the adipokine leptin on endothelial cells via LEPR ⁴⁰ , and
the actions of TGF-β1 on adipose fibrosis via its receptor TGF-βR1 ³³ .
The majority of these interactions, however, are unstudied in the
context of WAT biology.

WAT cell types and human disease

Adiposity is associated with a wide range of metabolic diseases and
traits, and GWAS studies have suggested a specific link between WAT and
coronary artery disease, BMI-adjusted type 2 diabetes (T2D),
dyslipidemia, and BMI-adjusted WHR ^(41 , 42 , 43) (a measure of body
fat distribution). To determine which specific cell types in WAT are
likely to mediate these associations, we used CELLECT, a method for
integrating scRNA-seq and sNuc-seq data with GWAS ⁴⁴ . As expected, type
1 diabetes (T1D) was significantly associated with B and T lymphocytes
and NK cells, consistent with the known autoimmune basis of that disease
(Fig. 4c ). No WAT cell type was associated with BMI, as expected given
the strong neuronal basis of body weight regulation ⁴⁵ . The strongest
phenotypic association for white adipocytes was with BMI-adjusted WHR,
and associations approaching significance were also noted between
adipocytes and high-density lipoprotein and BMI-adjusted T2D (Fig. 4c ,
Supplementary Table 7 ).

All adipocyte subpopulations were significantly associated with WHR
(Fig. 4d ), so we looked for genes responsible for the association with
WHR that lack specificity for any particular adipocyte subpopulation.
One such gene is PPARG , which is highly expressed in all adipocytes
(Extended Data Fig. 14a ). Data from the METSIM cohort indicates a
strong inverse relationship between WHR and PPARG in whole WAT (Extended
Data Fig. 14b ). Unfortunately, WHR was not recorded in the cohort used
to generate our floated human adipocytes. WHR is, however, highly
correlated with homeostatic model assessment for insulin resistance ¹¹
(HOMA-IR), and we found that PPARG expression showed a strong inverse
relationship with HOMA-IR in both the METSIM cohort and in our floated
adipocytes (Extended Data Fig. 14c, d ). Furthermore, SNPs in the PPARG
gene that are associated with BMI-adjusted WHR ³⁰ are also significantly
associated with PPARG mRNA and HOMA-IR in our floated adipocyte cohort
(Extended Data Fig. 14e–h ).

Adipocytes were also the cell type most likely to mediate the
association of WAT with T2D, with the strongest association specifically
with hAd7 (Fig. 4d ). To further investigate the association between
hAd7 and T2D, we plotted the abundance of hAd7 as a function of HOMA-IR
in our deconvolved floated adipocyte data. This revealed that hAd7 shows
significant inverse correlation with insulin resistance (Fig. 4e ). We
then searched for specific hAd7 marker genes that exhibit this same
relationship with HOMA-IR, and identified several (Fig. 4f, g ). Of
note, AGMO (also called TMEM195 ) has emerged as a candidate locus in
T2D GWAS ^(46 , 47) . Taken together, our data suggest that hAd7 may
have an outsized influence on the risk of T2D, despite representing only
about 1% of human adipocytes.

Additionally, although adipocytes did not meet genome-wide significance
for an association with low-density lipoprotein (LDL), we found a
near-significant relationship between LDL and hAd1, and to a lesser
extent, hAd4 (Fig. 4c, d ). Several hAd1- and hAd4-selective genes
showed a strong positive relationship with LDL in our floated adipocyte
cohort (Extended Data Fig. 14i, j )

We also performed CELLECT using the mouse data and noted associations
between BMI-adjusted WHR and mouse adipocytes and pre-adipocytes (
Extended Data Fig. 14k–m ). This suggests that WHR may be determined in
large part by alterations in adipocyte differentiation, a hypothesis
consistent with the PPARG data above, and with independent studies of
different WHR genes ⁴⁸ . High-density lipoprotein and triglyceride are
also associated with mouse white adipocyte gene expression (Extended
Data Fig. 14k–m ).

Discussion

Here we present a comprehensive atlas of human and mouse WAT across
depot and body mass. Our analysis reveals a rich array of cell types,
including blood and lymphatic vascular cells, immune cells, and ASPCs,
in addition to adipocytes. These cell types are grossly similar across
species, but differ more profoundly when cellular subpopulations are
explored. It is tempting to attribute these subpopulation differences to
divergence across 65 million years of evolution, but other factors also
need to be considered. For example, the human samples were collected
after a fast, whereas the mice were collected after ad libitum feeding,
which might be expected to cause some differences in cell state related
to insulin signalling or related pathways.

Overall, our data highlight a central role for adipocytes in the local
regulation of the adipose depot as well as in systemic physiology. The
single-cell resolution of our dataset enables the identification of
heterogeneity that cannot be appreciated by bulk RNA sequencing, such as
a potentially visceral thermogenic subpopulation (hAd6) and a rare
subpopulation associated with T2DM (hAd7). We additionally provide a
framework for mouse–human comparison in studies of adipose tissue that
will be an important resource for groups hoping to translate mouse
findings to human treatments. These data provide a lens of unprecedented
acuity that better informs our understanding of WAT biology and enables
a deeper exploration of the role of adipose tissue in health and
disease.

Methods

Collection of human adipose tissue samples

Drop-seq and floated adipocyte bulk RNA-seq

Subcutaneous adipose tissue was collected under Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center Committee on Clinical Investigations IRB 2011P000079.
Potential subjects were recruited in a consecutive fashion, as
scheduling permitted, from the plastic surgery operating room rosters at
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Male and female subjects over the
age of 18 undergoing elective plastic surgery procedures and free of
other acute medical conditions were included and provided written
informed consent preoperatively. Excess adipose tissue from the surgical
site was collected at the discretion of the surgeon during the normal
course of the procedure. Subjects with a diagnosis of diabetes, or
taking insulin-sensitizing medications such as thiazolidinediones or
metformin, chromatin-modifying enzymes such as valproic acid,
anti-retroviral medications, or drugs known to induce insulin resistance
such as mTOR inhibitors or systemic steroid medications, were excluded.

sNuc-Seq

Subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue was collected under BIDMC
Committee on Clinical Investigations IRB 2011P000079 and University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center STUDY 19010309. At BIDMC, potential subjects
were recruited in a consecutive fashion, as scheduling permitted, from
the gynecological, vascular, and general surgery rosters. Male and
female subjects over the age of 18 undergoing plastic surgery
(panniculectomy, thighplasty or deep inferior epigastric perforators),
gynecological surgery (total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy) or general surgery (cholecystectomy (CCY) or
colon polyp surgery) and free of other acute medical conditions were
included and provided written informed consent preoperatively. Excess
adipose tissue from the surgical site was collected at the discretion of
the surgeon during the normal course of the procedure. The exclusion
criteria were any subjects taking thiazolidinediones,
chromatin-modifying enzymes such as valproic acid, anti-retroviral
medications, and drugs known to induce insulin resistance such as mTOR
inhibitors or systemic steroid medications. At UPMC, inclusion criteria
were patients receiving bariatric surgery (vertical sleeve gastrectomy
or roux en Y gastric bypass) or lean controls (hernia or CCY surgeries)
ages 21–60, exclusion criteria were diagnosis of diabetes (Type 1 or
Type 2), pregnancy, alcohol or drug addiction, bleeding or clotting
abnormality, or inflammatory abdominal disease. All patients provided
written informed consent preoperatively. Excess adipose tissue from the
surgical site was collected at the discretion of the surgeon during the
normal course of the procedure. 200–500 mg samples were flash frozen
immediately after collection for downstream processing.

Mouse adipose tissue samples

All animal experiments were performed under a protocol approved by the
BIDMC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Male C57Bl/6J
16-week-old HFD-fed (JAX 380050) and chow-fed (JAX 380056) mice were
obtained from The Jackson Laboratory and maintained on 60% HFD (Research
Diets, D12492) or chow diet (8664 Harlan Teklad, 6.4% wt/wt fat),
respectively, for three weeks before sacrifice at 19 weeks. Female
6-week-old chow fed C57Bl/6J mice (JAX 380056) were maintained on 60%
HFD for 13 weeks before sacrifice at 19 weeks. Mice were maintained
under a 12 h light/12 h dark cycle at constant temperature (23 °C) and
humidity in the range of 30%–70% with free access to food and water.
There were no calculations performed to determine sample size. Animals
were not randomized and researchers were not blinded to the diet of the
animal due to the nature of the study. During dissection, to avoid
contamination by cells from the inguinal lymph node, we excised the node
with a fairly wide margin, possibly de-enriching beige adipocytes from
our samples ⁴⁹ .

Mature human adipocyte sample preparation

Purification of mature human adipocytes

Whole tissue subcutaneous adipose specimens were freshly collected from
the operating room. Skin was removed, and adipose tissue was cut into 1-
to 2-inch pieces and rinsed thoroughly with 37 °C PBS to remove blood.
Cleaned adipose tissue pieces were quickly minced in an electric grinder
with 3/16-inch hole plate, and 400 ml of sample was placed in a 2-liter
wide-mouthed Erlenmeyer culture flask with 100 ml of freshly prepared
blendzyme (Roche Liberase TM, research grade, cat. no. 05401127001, in
PBS, at a ratio of 6.25 mg per 50 ml) and shaken in a 37 °C shaking
incubator at 120 r.p.m. for 15–20 min to digest until the sample
appeared uniform. Digestion was stopped with 100 ml of freshly made KRB
(5.5 mM glucose, 137 mM NaCl, 15 mM HEPES, 5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM CaCl ₂ ,
0.44 mM KH ₂ PO ₄ , 0.34 mM Na ₂ HPO ₄ and 0.8 mM MgSO ₄ ), supplemented
with 2% BSA. Digested tissue was filtered through a 300 μM sieve and
washed with KRB/albumin and flow through until only connective tissue
remained. Samples were centrifuged at 233 g for 5 min at room
temperature, clear lipid was later removed, and floated adipocyte
supernatant was collected, divided into aliquots and flash-frozen in
liquid nitrogen.

Sample selection and Bulk-RNA-seq library construction

Fasting serum was collected and insulin, glucose, free fatty acids, and
a lipid panel were measured by Labcorp. BMI measures were derived from
electronic medical records and confirmed by self-reporting, and measures
of insulin resistance, the homeostasis model assessment-estimated
insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR) and revised quantitative insulin
sensitivity check index (QUICKI) were calculated ^(50 , 51) . Female
subjects in the first and fourth quartiles for either HOMA-IR or QUICKI
and matched for age and BMI were processed for RNA-seq.

Total RNA from about 400 μl of thawed floated adipocytes was isolated in
TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. For RNA-seq library construction, mRNA was purified from
100 ng of total RNA by using a Ribo-Zero rRNA removal kit (Epicentre) to
deplete ribosomal RNA and convert into double-stranded complementary DNA
by using an NEBNext mRNA Second Strand Synthesis Module (E6111L). cDNA
was subsequently tagmented and amplified for 12 cycles by using a
Nextera XT DNA Library Preparation Kit (Illumina FC-131). Sequencing
libraries were analysed with Qubit and Agilent Bioanalyzer, pooled at a
final loading concentration of 1.8 pM and sequenced on a NextSeq500.

Single-cell and single-nucleus sample preparation and processing

SVF isolation and Drop-seq

Adipose tissue samples were collected and processed as above. After
removal of floated adipocytes, remaining supernatant was aspirated and
the remaining pelleted stromal vascular fraction (SVF)was combined from
multiple tubes. The combined SVF was washed 2 times with 50 ml cold PBS
with 233 g for 5 min centrifugation between washes. Erythrocytes were
depleted with two rounds of 25 ml. ACK lysing buffer (Gibco A1049201)
exposure (5 min at RT followed by 233 g × 5 min centrifugation).
Remaining SVF pellet was further washed two times with 50 ml cold PBS
prior to counting on a haematocytometer and loading onto Drop-seq
microfluidic devices. Drop-seq was performed as described ⁵² , with the
following modifications: first, flow rates of 2.1 ml h ⁻¹ were used for
each aqueous suspension and 12 ml h ⁻¹ for the oil. Second, libraries
were sequenced on the Illumina NextSeq500, using between 1.6–1.7 pM in a
volume of 1.2 ml HT1 and 3 ml of 0.3 μM Read1CustSeqB
(GCCTGTCCGCGGAAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTAC) using a 20 × 8 × 60 read
structure.

sNuc-seq

Nuclei were isolated from frozen mouse and human adipose tissue samples
for 10x snRNA-seq using a slightly modified approach to what was
previously described ^(53 , 54 , 55) . Samples were kept frozen on dry
ice until immediately before nuclei isolation, and all sample handling
steps were performed on ice. Each flash-frozen adipose tissue sample was
placed into a gentleMACS C tube (Miltenyi Biotec) with 2 ml freshly
prepared TST buffer (0.03% Tween 20 (Bio-Rad), 0.01% Molecular Grade BSA
(New England Biolabs), 146 mM NaCl (ThermoFisher Scientific), 1 mM CaCl
₂ (VWR International), 21 mM MgCl ₂ (Sigma Aldrich), and 10 mM Tris-Hcl
pH 7.5 (ThermoFisher Scientific) in Ultrapure water (ThermoFisher
Scientific)) with or without 0.2 U µl ⁻¹ of Protector RNase Inhibitor
(Sigma Aldrich). gentleMACS C tubes were then placed on the gentleMACS
Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec) and tissue was dissociated by running the
program mr_adipose_01 twice, and then incubated on ice for 10 min.
Lysate was passed through a 40 µm nylon filter (CellTreat) and collected
into a 50 ml conical tube (Corning). Filter was rinsed with 3 ml of
freshly prepared ST buffer buffer (146 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl ₂ , 21 mM MgCl
₂ ; 10 mM Tris-Hcl pH 7.5) with or without 0.2 U µl ⁻¹ RNase Inhibitor,
and collected into the same tube. Flow-through was centrifuged at 500 g
for 5 min at 4 °C with brake set to low. Following centrifugation,
supernatant was removed, and the nuclear pellet was resuspended in
50–200 µl PBS pH 7.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) with 0.02% BSA, with or
without 0.2 U µl ⁻¹ RNase inhibitor. In order to reduce ambient mRNA,
the nuclear pellets of some samples were washed 1–3 times with 5 ml PBS,
0.02% BSA before final resuspension. An aliquot of nuclei from each
sample was stained with NucBlue (Thermofisher Scientific), counted in a
haemocytometer using fluorescence to identify intact nuclei, and then
immediately loaded on the 10x Chromium controller (10x Genomics)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

For each sample, 10,000–16,500 nuclei were loaded in one channel of a
Chromium Chip (10x Genomics). The Single Cell 3′ v3.1 chemistry was used
to process all samples. cDNA and gene expression libraries were
generated according to the manufacturer’s instructions (10x Genomics).
cDNA and gene expression library fragment sizes were assessed with a DNA
High Sensitivity Bioanalyzer Chip (Agilent). cDNA and gene expression
libraries were quantified using the Qubit dsDNA High Sensitivity assay
kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Gene expression libraries were
multiplexed and sequenced on the Nextseq 500 (Illumina) with a 75-cycle
kit and the following read structure: Read 1: 28 cycles, Read 2: 55
cycles, Index Read 1: 8 cycles.

Public datasets

Publicly available datasets and databases used were the following:
METSIM RNA-seq data from Raulerson et al. ¹³ ( GSE135134 ); single-cell
ASPC data from Burl et al. ⁴ ( SRP145475 ), Hepler et al. ⁶ ( GSE111588
), Merrick et al. ⁵ ( GSE128889 ), Sárvári et al. ⁹ ( GSE160729 ), and
Schwalie et al. ³ (E-MTAB-6677); human assembly GRCh38 and GENCODE
annotation 27 ( https://www.gencodegenes.org/human/release_27.html );
mouse assembly GRCm38 and GENCODE annotation M16 (
https://www.gencodegenes.org/mouse/release_M16.html ).

Sequencing, read alignments, and quality control

Single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq data analysis

Raw sequencing reads were demultiplexed to FASTQ format files using
bcl2fastq (Illumina; version 2.20.0). Digital expression matrices were
generated from the FASTQ files using the Drop-Seq tools (
https://github.com/broadinstitute/Drop-seq , version 2.4.0) pipeline,
with appropriate adjustments made to the default program parameters to
account for the different read-structures in the scRNA Drop-Seq data and
sNuc 10x data. Reads from mouse and human were aligned with STAR ⁵⁶
(version 2.7.3) against the GRCm38 and GRCh38 genome assemblies,
respectively. Gene counts were obtained, on a per-droplet basis, by
summarizing the unique read alignments across exons and introns in
appropriate GENCODE annotations (release 16 of the mouse annotation and
release 27 of the human annotation). In order to adjust for downstream
effects of ambient RNA expression within mouse nuclei (hereafter
“cells”), we used CellBender ⁵⁷ (version 0.2.0) to remove counts due to
ambient RNA molecules from the count matrices and estimate the true
cells. We also used CellBender to distinguish droplets containing cells
from droplets containing only ambient RNA, by selecting droplets
with >50% posterior probability of containing a cell. We compared the
true cell estimation obtained using CellBender against the same using
the DropletUtils software package ⁵⁸ , which estimates ambient RNA
expression but does not remove any ambient counts, keeping only the
cells that were marked as not ambient by both algorithms. To address
ambient RNA in the human sNuc data, we calculated spliced and unspliced
RNA content in each cell, because nuclei have a high unspliced RNA
content, a high percentage of spliced RNA indicates a high ambient RNA
content. We therefore removed sNuc-seq cells containing over 75% spliced
RNA. All samples were assessed for doublet content using scrublet ⁵⁹
version 0.2.1, and cells called as doublets were removed before further
analysis. All cells were further filtered to have greater than 400
unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) with <10% of UMIs from mitochondrial
genes. Genes were filtered such that only genes detected in two or more
cells were retained. For the human data, the median number of UMIs
detected per cell was 2,559 and the median number of genes detected per
cell was 1,524. For the mouse data, the median number of UMIs detected
per cell was 2,291 and the median number of genes detected per cell was
1,369.

Bulk RNA-seq analysis

Raw sequencing reads were demultiplexed by using bcl2fastq (Illumina).
Salmon ⁶⁰ (version 1.1.0) was used to simultaneously map and quantify
transcript abundances of hg19 genes annotated by release 19 of the
GENCODE project’s human reference. Salmon was run using “full” selective
alignment (SAF) with mapping validation as described previously ⁶¹ .
Gene counts were summarized from transcript abundances using the
tximport package for R ⁶² .

Integration, clustering, subclustering and annotation

Integration, clustering and subclustering analysis were performed using
Seurat 4.0.0 ⁶³ . The gene counts were normalized using SCTransform ⁶⁴ ,
and regressed on mitochondrial read percentage, ribosomal read
percentage, and cell cycle score as determined by Seurat. In order to
avoid smoothing over depot differences, for integration human and mouse
data were grouped by ‘individual’, that is, if both subcutaneous and
visceral adipose tissue for an individual human or mouse were available,
they were pooled together during this step. Individuals were integrated
with reciprocal principal components analysis (PCA), using individuals
that had both subcutaneous and visceral samples as references. As a
result, the human and mouse references were comprised exclusively from
the sNuc-seq cohort. To integrate, references were integrated together,
then the remaining samples— sNuc-seq individuals with only subcutaneous
data as well as all Drop-seq samples—were mapped to the reference. For
clustering, 5,000 variable genes were used, and ribosomal and
mitochondrial genes were removed from the variable gene set before
running PCA and calculating clusters using a Louvain algorithm,
40 principal components, and a resolution of 0.5. Clusters were
identified as adipocytes, preadipocytes, mesothelial cells, vascular
cells, or immune cells using marker genes, subset into individual
objects, and re-integrated using the above method. Samples with fewer
than 50 cells in the subset were removed before re-integration. This led
to samples having artificially fewer cells in some instances—for example
some Drop-seq samples had cells that clustered with adipocytes, but
these cells were removed in subclustering because the small numbers of
cells introduced too much variability into the integration.
Subclustering was performed using a range of variable genes
(1,000–2,000), PCs (10–40) and resolutions (0.2–0.6). Markers were
calculated using a non-parametric Wilcoxon rank sum test with P values
adjusted using Bonferroni correction (Supplementary Tables 1 , 2 ), and
clusters were evaluated based on the distinctness of called markers to
determine the final subclustering conditions. In the subclustered
objects, we removed clusters that appeared to represent doublets based
on the score assigned by scrublet ⁵⁹ , or that appeared to be driven by
high ambient RNA content as determined by percentage of mitochondrial
genes and spliced/unspliced RNA ratio. The remaining clusters were
annotated based on marker gene expression. In some cases, smaller
subclusters (T and NK cells, B cells, monocytes/neutrophils) were
further subset and PCA and clustering analysis but not integration was
re-run in order to assign clusters. After subcluster annotation,
identities were mapped back onto the original object and cells that were
removed from the subclustered objects were similarly removed from the
all-cell object.

Deconvolution of bulk RNA-seq data

Bulk RNA sequencing data for subcutaneous adipose tissue from the METSIM
cohort were obtained as described previously ¹³ . Only individuals with
available metabolic phenotyping data were used for the deconvolution
analysis. Bulk RNA sequencing data for floated human adipocytes were
obtained described above. Deconvolution analysis was performed using
MuSiC ¹² (version 0.1.1) with human sNuc subcutaneous all cell or
adipocyte data as reference. Marker genes used for deconvolution can be
found in Supplementary Table 1 .

Comparison between mouse and human datasets

Mapping of mouse cells onto human clusters was performed using Seurat
multimodal reference mapping ⁶⁵ . To run, for the all-cell and each
subset, the mouse data were prepared by extracting the counts matrix
from the mouse sNuc object and mapping the mouse gene names to their
human orthologs using a database of ortholog mappings from Mouse Genome
Informatics ( http://www.informatics.jax.org/homology.shtml ). In the
case of multi-mapping, the first ortholog pair was used. The mouse
object was then split by sample and mapped onto the sNuc-seq data from
the matching human all-cell or subset object using the RNA assay and PCA
reduction.

Integration of ASPCs from this and other studies

Data was obtained from Burl et al. ⁴ (SRP145475), Hepler et al. ⁶
(GSE111588), Merrick et al. ⁵ (GSE128889), Sárvári et al. ⁹ (GSE160729),
and Schwalie et al. ³ (E-MTAB-6677); processed data, metadata, and/or
cell type designations were obtained from the authors when necessary.
Datasets were subset to contain only ASPCs, grouped by individual animal
or experiment when possible or by laboratory when not, and integrated
with the data from this paper (grouped by animal) using RPCA integration
without references with 1,500 variable genes. The UMAP reduction was
calculated using the top 20 PCs and ASPCs were grouped by cell type
annotations from their original papers for analysis.

Immunohistochemistry

Subcutaneous (abdominal) and omental adipose tissue biopsies belonging
to lean and obese women (GRIA4: subcutaneous, 5 lean and 5 obese
individuals; PGAP1: subcutaneous, 5 lean, 4 obese, visceral 3 lean, 4
obese; EBF2: omental, 3 lean and 4 obese individuals; AGMO:
subcutaneous, 4 lean and 4 obese individuals, for all experiments two
slides per individual for GRIA4, EBF2, AGMO, one slide per individual
for PGAP1) were fixed (overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 °C,
dehydrated, paraffin embedded and sectioned (4 μm thick). The following
primary antibodies and respective dilution were used: GRIA4, 1:200,
23350-1-AP, Proteintech; PGAP1, 1:400, Cat. #55392-1-AP, Proteintech
EBF2, 1:1000, AF7006, R&D systems; AGMO (TMEM195) 1:100, orb395684,
Biorbyt. In brief, after rinsing in PBS, tissue slices were blocked with
3% normal goat serum and incubated with the primary antibody in PBS,
overnight at 4 °C. After a thorough rinse in PBS, sections were
incubated in 1:200 v/v biotinylated secondary antibody solution for
30 min (Invitrogen), rinsed in PBS and incubated in
avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex (ABC Standard, Vector Laboratories),
washed several times in PBS and lastly incubated in
3,3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (0.05% in 0.05 M Tris with
0.03% H ₂ O ₂ ; 5 min). After immunohistochemical staining, sections
were counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated in ethanol, cleared in
xylene and covered with coverslip using Eukitt (Merck). All observations
were performed using Nikon Eclipse E800 light microscope.

Immunofluorescence microscopy of mature human adipocytes

Adipocyte immunofluorescence protocol was adapted from Sárvári et al ⁹ .
Abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue was collected from two adult
female human subjects (BMI 24.9 and 40.3) as above and placed on ice.
Tissue was minced and digested with 1 mg ml ⁻¹ type II collagenase
(Sigma-Aldrich, C6885) in Hanks’ balanced salt solution supplemented
with 0.5% fatty acid-free BSA (Sigma-Aldrich, A6003) at 37° in a water
bath with constant shaking at 250 rpm. The cell suspension was filtered
through a 250 µM nylon mesh strainer (Thermo, 87791) and washed three
times with Krebs–Ringer bicarbonate buffer containing 1% fatty acid-free
BSA. All washes throughout this protocol were performed without
centrifugation to minimize adipocyte damage and loss; cell suspension
was maintained upright for at least 5 min to allow mature adipocytes to
float, and infranatant was removed with a needle and syringe. The
floating adipocytes were fixed with 2% PFA and 1% sucrose in PBS for
30 min with constant rotation followed by three washes with 2% fatty
acid-free BSA in PBS. Adipocytes were subsequently permeabilized with
0.5% Triton-X (Thermo, 28314) in PBS for five minutes, and incubated
with 2.5 µg ml ⁻¹ trypsin (Corning, 25053CI) in PBS for 10 min at 37° in
a water bath with constant shaking. Adipocytes were then blocked with 2%
fatty acid-free BSA in PBS for 30 min, and incubated overnight at room
temperature with rabbit polyclonal anti-GRIA4 (Proteintech, 23350-1-AP)
diluted 1:100 in 500 µl 2% fatty acid-free BSA in PBS with constant
rotation. The adipocytes were then washed twice for 10 min each with
0.1% fatty acid-free BSA and 0.05% Tween-20 (Sigma-Aldrich, P9416) in
PBS, followed by incubation with goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 546
(Thermo, A-11035) secondary antibody diluted 1:500 in 2% fatty acid-free
BSA for 2 h with rotation. For the final 30 min of incubation, Hoechst
33342 (Thermo, 62249) and BODIPY 493/503 (Invitrogen, D3922) were added
at 1:500 dilutions. Adipocytes were washed twice and resuspended in
300 µl Fluoromount G (Southern Biotech, 0100-01) and mounted on glass
slides with 1.4–1.6 mm concavity wells (Electron Microscopy Sciences,
71878-03). A sample of adipocytes was also incubated as above but
without primary antibody to verify the specificity of the secondary
antibody. Fluorescence images were acquired using Zeiss LSM 880 Upright
Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope with filter cubes for DAPI, GFP, and
Rhodamine in parallel using the 20× objective and processed using Zen
Black 2.3 software. Images were analysed and counted with ImageJ v.
1.53 k.

Ex vivo differentiation and transcriptional and high-content image-based characterization of differentiating primary human adipocyte progenitors

We obtained adipocyte progenitors from subcutaneous and visceral adipose
tissue from patients undergoing a range of abdominal laparoscopic
surgeries (sleeve gastrectomy, fundoplication or appendectomy). The
visceral adipose tissue is derived from the proximity of the angle of
His and subcutaneous adipose tissue obtained from beneath the skin at
the site of surgical incision. Additionally, human liposuction material
was obtained. Each participant gave written informed consent before
inclusion and the study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of
the Technical University of Munich (study no. 5716/13). Isolation of
AMSCs was performed as previously described ²⁸ , and cells were
differentiated in culture over 14 days. Ex vivo differentiated
adipocytes were stained and imaged, and features were extracted using
LipocyteProfiler as described ²⁸ . RNA-sequencing libraries were
prepared and sequenced and QC’ed as previously described ²⁸ . Bulk-RNA
sequencing counts from subcutaneous and visceral samples differentiated
for 14 days were deconvoluted using both subcutaneous and visceral
adipocytes as reference as described above. Raw images collected during
LipocyteProfiler analysis were randomly selected from samples predicted
to have high or low content of hAd3, hAd5, or hAd6 adipocytes, and
pseudocoloured and combined using Adobe Photoshop.

Gene pathway analysis

Analysis of enriched pathways in adipocyte markers was performed using
clusterProfiler ⁶⁶ (version 3.16.1). Adipocyte cluster markers were
filtered to a Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted P -value < .05, then evaluated
for enrichment in GO biological pathways or KEGG pathways containing
under 300 genes. All pathways and P values can be found in Supplementary
Table 3 .

Identification and analysis of EBF2 SNP association with visceral adiposity

VAT, ASAT, and GFAT volumes in 40,032 individuals from the UK Biobank
^(67 , 68) who underwent MRI imaging were quantified as described
elsewhere ⁶⁹ . Variant rs4872393 was identified as a lead SNP associated
with VATadj and waist-to-hip ratio from summary statistics of two prior
studies ^(31 , 70) . Among the cohort who underwent MRI imaging, all
variants at this locus (±250 kb around rs4872393) with minor allele
frequency ≥ 0.005 and imputation quality (INFO) score ≥ 0.3 were
analysed. For all 554 nominally significant ( P < 0.05) variants
associated with VATadj in this region, a secondary conditional analysis
testing for association with VATadj was performed controlling for
rs4872393 carrier status ( P < 0.05/554 = 9 × 10 ⁻⁵ ). Participants were
excluded from analysis if they met any of the following criteria: (1)
mismatch between self-reported sex and sex chromosome count, (2) sex
chromosome aneuploidy, (3) genotyping call rate < 0.95, or (4) were
outliers for heterozygosity. Up to 37,641 participants were available
for analysis. Fat depot volumes adjusted for BMI and height (‘adj’
traits) were calculated by taking the residuals of the fat depot in
sex-specific linear regressions against age at the time of MRI, age
squared, BMI, and height ³¹ . Each trait was scaled to mean 0 and
variance 1 in sex-specific groups before being combined for analysis.
Linear regressions between a given trait-variant pair were adjusted for
age at the time of imaging, age squared, sex, the first 10 principal
components of genetic ancestry, genotyping array, and MRI imaging
center. Analyses were performed using R 3.6.0 (R Project for Statistical
Computing). EBF2 regional visualization plot was made with the LocusZoom
online tool ⁷¹ .

Calculation of pseudobulk datasets to estimate adipose innervation

Approximate bulk RNA-seq datasets (pseudobulk) were obtained for
visceral sNuc-seq samples by summing the total expression per-gene
across all droplets containing a valid 10x cell barcode. This includes
all cells that would normally have been removed in the single-nuclei
studies by any of the filtering criteria (above): doublet score,
splicing content, droplets with fewer than 400 UMIs, etc, in order to
preserve the ambient RNA present in otherwise empty droplets. Repeated
UMIs were still collapsed into single counts (per-droplet) before
summing. Amounts of pan-neuronal markers were calculated using this
pesudobulk dataset and plotted against the proportion of visceral
populations hAd2 and hAd6 relative to total adipocytes in each sample.

Prediction of cell–cell interactions

Analysis of cell–cell interactions was performed using CellphoneDB ³⁸
(version 2.0.0). For human data, sNuc-seq count data were split into
files containing cells from subcutaneous and visceral fat from
individuals with BMI lower than 30 or higher than 40. CellphoneDB with
statistical analysis was run on each file separately to evaluate
interactions in each condition. For mouse data, count data were split
into files containing cells from the inguinal and perigonadal fat of
chow- and HFD-fed mice. Mouse gene names were converted to human gene
names, as above, before running CellphoneDB with statistical analysis on
each file.

Identification of candidate aetiologic cell types using CELLEX and CELLECT

CELLECT and CELLEX were used to identify candidate aetiological cell
types for a total of 23 traits. The input data for CELLECT is GWAS
summary statistics for a given trait and cell type expression
specificity (ES) estimates derived from single-cell RNA-seq data. The
output is a list of prioritized candidate aetiologic cell types for a
given trait. ES estimates were calculated using CELLEX (version 1.1),
which computes robust estimates of ES by relying on multiple expression
specificity measures (for further details see Timshel et al. ⁴⁴ ).
CELLEX was run separately on the raw mouse and human (sNuc) gene
expression matricies to compute gene expression specificities for each
cluster based on the clustering assignment reported above. The resulting
cell type specificity matrix was used along with multiple GWAS studies
^(30 , 72 , 73 , 74 , 75 , 76) (Extended Data Table 3 ) as input for
CELLECT ⁴⁴ (version 1.1), which was run with default parameters.
Significant cell types were identified using a by-trait and by-species
Bonferroni P -value threshold of P < 0.05.

SNP analysis for bulk mRNA-seq cohort

The raw GTC SNP expression data from Infinium OmniExpress-24 Kit was
converted to VCF format using Picard version 2.21.6. The pre-processing
of the SNP data before phasing and imputation was performed using plink2
( https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/2.0/ ). The SNP genotype was then
phased and imputed using the Eagle v2.3.5 ⁷⁷ and Minimac3 ⁷⁸ packages,
respectively. SNPs were mapped to the NCBI database using the rsnps
package ( https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=rsnps ) and filtered to
keep only SNPs that had a minor allele frequency > 0.05. For plotting
gene expression against genotype, bulk RNA sequencing data were TMM
normalized using edgeR ⁷⁹ . Statistical validation for significance was
done using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, which is a non-parametric test
assuming independent samples.

Statistics

P -values for scatterplots were calculated using GraphPad Prism version
8.0 and represent the results of an extra sum-of-squares F -test with
the null hypothesis that the slope equals zero. All error bars on bar
graphs represent standard error. Statistics on proportional composition
graphs were calculated using scCODA ⁸⁰ (version 0.1.2) using the
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo sampling method. The model formula used was
‘Depot + BMI’ (human) or ‘Depot + Diet’) (mouse) for all objects in for
which both of these covariates were present, or the individual covariate
when only a single condition was present.

Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
