-   Article
-   Published: 23 December 2019

Single-cell analysis of human adipose tissue identifies depot- and disease-specific cell types

-   Jinchu Vijay ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7311-475X ^(1 , 2) ,
-   Marie-Frédérique Gauthier ³ ,
-   Rebecca L. Biswell ⁴ ,
-   Daniel A. Louiselle ⁴ ,
-   Jeffrey J. Johnston ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8962-6186 ⁴ ,
-   Warren A. Cheung ⁴ ,
-   Bradley Belden ⁴ ,
-   Albena Pramatarova ² ,
-   Laurent Biertho ³ ,
-   Margaret Gibson ⁴ ,
-   Marie-Michelle Simon ² ,
-   Haig Djambazian ² ,
-   Alfredo Staffa ² ,
-   Guillaume Bourque ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-3933-9656 ^(1 , 2) ,
-   Anita Laitinen ⁵ ,
-   Johanna Nystedt ⁵ ,
-   Marie-Claude Vohl ⁶ ,
-   Jason D. Fraser ⁷ ,
-   Tomi Pastinen ⁴ ,
-   André Tchernof [] ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2587-1000 ³ &
-   …
-   Elin Grundberg [] ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5415-7896 ⁴

[] Show authors

Nature Metabolism volume 2 , pages 97–109 ( 2020 ) Cite this article

-   19k Accesses

-   238 Citations

-   79 Altmetric

-   Metrics details

Abstract

The complex relationship between metabolic disease risk and body fat
distribution in humans involves cellular characteristics that are
specific to body fat compartments. Here we show depot-specific
differences in the stromal vascular fraction of visceral and
subcutaneous adipose tissue by performing single-cell RNA sequencing of
tissue specimens from obese individuals. We characterize multiple immune
cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, adipose and haematopoietic stem
cell progenitors. Subpopulations of adipose-resident immune cells are
metabolically active and associated with metabolic disease status,
including a population of potential dysfunctional CD8 ⁺ T cells that
express metallothioneins. We identify multiple types of adipocyte
progenitors that are common across depots, including a subtype enriched
in individuals with type 2 diabetes. Depot-specific analysis reveals a
class of adipocyte progenitors unique to visceral adipose tissue, which
shares common features with beige pre-adipocytes. Our human single-cell
transcriptome atlas across fat depots provides a resource to dissect the
functional genomics of metabolic disease.

<div class="c-nature-box c-nature-box--side "
data-component="entitlement-box"> <p class="c-nature-box__text
js-text">You have full access to this article via your institution.</p>
<div class="c-pdf-download u-clear-both js-pdf-download"> <a
href="/articles/s42255-019-0152-6.pdf" class="u-button
u-button--full-width u-button--primary u-justify-content-space-between
c-pdf-download__link" data-article-pdf="true"
data-readcube-pdf-url="true" data-test="download-pdf"
data-draft-ignore="true" data-track="content_download"
data-track-type="article pdf download" data-track-action="download pdf"
data-track-label="link" data-track-external download> <span
class="c-pdf-download__text">Download PDF</span> <svg aria-hidden="true"
focusable="false" width="16" height="16" class="u-icon"><use
xlink:href="#icon-download"/></svg> </a> </div> </div>

You have full access to this article via University of California,
Berkeley Nature Masterclasses

Download PDF []

Similar content being viewed by others

[]

Single-cell sequencing of human white adipose tissue identifies new cell states in health and obesity

Article 27 April 2021

[]

Insulin signaling establishes a developmental trajectory of adipose regulatory T cells

Article 24 August 2021

[]

An integrated single cell and spatial transcriptomic map of human white adipose tissue

Article Open access 15 March 2023

Main

White adipose tissue (WAT) and its endocrine activities are known to be
implicated in the development of obesity and associated metabolic
disorders. Specifically, the risk increases with increased abdominal
obesity contributed by excessive visceral adipose tissue (VAT) ¹ —a
linear relationship that is not seen with abdominal subcutaneous adipose
tissue (SAT) ² . Susceptibility to obesity-related cardiovascular and
metabolic disorders has also been linked to the increase in adipose
volume resulting from enlargement of tissue-resident adipocytes (that
is, hypertrophy) ³ . However, adipocyte expansion by recruiting new
progenitors (hyperplasia) is often considered a protective mechanism
from the metabolic standpoint ⁴ . Studies have also shown that adipose
tissue dysfunction leading to insulin-resistant type 2 diabetes (T2D) is
marked by inflammation, fibrosis, lipodystrophy or a combination of
these factors ⁵ , which emphasizes the importance of
adipose-infiltrating immune cell populations in modulating and
developing metabolic disorders. For instance, M1 macrophages, mast
cells, B-2 cells, CD8 ⁺ T cells and IFN-γ ⁺ Th1 cells were increased in
the adipose tissue of individuals with obesity compared with those who
were normal weight, and the reverse pattern was observed in M2
macrophages, eosinophils, T _(reg) cells, invariant natural killer T
(iNKT) cells, B1 cells and γδ T cells ⁶ . These adipose-tissue-resident
immune cells have also been shown to create a microenvironment that can
inhibit adipocyte progenitor differentiation to lipid-storing adipocytes
⁷ . However, despite extensive work on characterizing various cell
subpopulations in adipose tissue, the complete human non-adipocyte
fraction, also known as the stromal vascular fraction (SVF), has not
been profiled across depots in an unbiased manner. Given the multitude
of factors affecting adipose tissue function, a thorough understanding
of the cell types involved and their specific gene expression pattern is
essential. The emergence of single-cell transcriptomic approaches in the
past few years has made it possible to use these technologies to
determine cellular heterogeneity and functional states at the
single-cell level with high reproducibility and sensitivity ⁸ . Current
high-throughput microfluidics techniques can capture thousands of cells
from each sample simultaneously for gene expression profiling and,
together with new algorithms for clustering, visualization and
modelling, this allows for high-powered analysis of disease-targeted
tissue samples for efficient cataloguing of cellular compositions and
roles in disease risk. Recent studies using single-cell RNA sequencing
(scRNA-seq) in adipose tissue from mouse models have identified a subset
of adipocyte progenitors that regulates adipocyte differentiation ⁹ and
a novel type of inflammatory progenitor residing in the visceral fat
depot of mice ¹⁰ . Similar strategies in human adipose samples have not
been applied so far.

We present a high-throughput single-cell expression profiling study of
human adipose tissue including 25 samples derived from multiple depots
of individuals with obesity. We provide a rich catalogue of cell types
residing in adipose tissue, including both latent and common cell
populations. We characterize and validate distinct cell types that are
metabolically active or specific to each depot, or that correlate with
metabolic disease status.

Results

Characterization of SVF across multiple adipose depots

We generated scRNA-seq data from 25 adipose samples (12 VAT and 13 SAT)
derived from 14 individuals undergoing bariatric surgery (Supplementary
Table 1 , Supplementary Fig. 1 and Methods ). All samples were matched
for age and body-mass index (BMI), but fasting glycaemia differed
between those with and without T2D (Table 1 ). We annotated the clusters
using marker genes (Supplementary Tables 2 , 3 ), which resulted in
three groups of cells: adipocyte progenitors and stem cells (P1–P7),
immune cells (I1–I7) and endothelial cells (E1–E3) (Fig. 1 ). The
average proportion of cell types per individual was 55% progenitors, 37%
immune cells and 8% endothelial cells. This distribution was similar to
the merged sample, which was 60% progenitors, 34% immune cells and 6%
endothelial cells; this is in line with the results of classic
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) experiments ¹¹ . To avoid
subjectivity and to add strength to the analyses, we also performed
reference-based single-cell annotation ( Methods ), which confirmed our
broad clusters of cell populations (Supplementary Table 4 ). Finally, as
the distribution of female and male samples was slightly skewed (Table 1
), we performed in-depth sex-specific expression analysis of the marker
genes in 245 ( n = 165 male and n = 80 female) VAT and SAT samples from
the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) Consortium (Supplementary Table 5
).

Full size table []

Table 1 Characteristics of the study subjects

[figure 1]

Clustering results of 26,350 cells from the SVF derived from 25 adipose
samples that underwent scRNA-seq, identifying 17 clusters. Cell
populations were classified as progenitors (P1–P7), immune cells
(I1–I17) and endothelial cells (E1–E3) and labelled accordingly.

Full size image []

Fig. 1: Identified cell populations in the non-adipocyte fraction of
adipose tissue.

Multiple types of endothelial cells reside in adipose tissue

We identified three types of endothelial cells (E1–E3, Fig. 1 ), all
showing selective expression for GNG11 and SEPW1 . E1 and E2 cells were
fairly similar, sharing nearly half of their top expressed genes,
including SPARCL1 , FABP4 and IFI27 . However, comparative analysis
between E1 and E2 cells showed that E2 cells express classic endothelial
markers such as ACKR1 , SELE , TM4SF1 , VCAM1 , TMEM173 , PLVAP , ICAM1
, PECAM1 , VWF , ADAMTS9 and TFPI . By contrast, E1 cells had pronounced
expression of FABP4 , LGALS1 , RBP7 , GPX3 and CD36 , which are
expressed in the microvascular endothelial cells of adipose tissue
involved in the fatty-acid-handling machinery ¹² . To characterize E3,
we performed differential gene expression analysis between E3 and the
combined population of E1 and E2 cells (Supplementary Table 6 ) and
found LYVE1 among the top expressed genes. LYVE1 is a marker of
lymphatic endothelial cells ¹³ and these results therefore indicate the
presence of lymphatic vasculature in the SVF, with 78% of its cell
population from VAT samples.

Characterization of immune cells and their link to adipose tissue inflammation

We found that 34% of cells from our merged clusters (I1–I17, Fig. 1 and
Supplementary Table 4 ) expressed markers of different immune cell
populations. To facilitate the classification of the cell types we
subset the immune cell clusters and identified 14 new clusters, labelled
IS1–IS14, in which all groups were present across depots (Fig. 2a,b ).

[figure 2]

Re-clustering of 9,025 CD34 ⁻ cells representing immune cells in the SVF
of adipose tissue identified 14 cell types including T and natural
killer cells (IS1, IS4, IS6 and IS8), macrophages (IS2, IS3, IS7, IS9
and IS12), dendritic cells (IS5 and IS13), monocytes (IS10) and B cells
(IS11) in the SAT ( a ) and VAT ( b ). Violin plots of expression
density of metallothionein genes across T cell and natural killer cell
clusters in discovery samples ( c , n = 25) and CD34 ⁻ validation
samples ( d , n = 3). The y axis indicates log-transformed expression
values and the width indicates the number of cells expressing the
particular gene. Immunohistochemistry in subcutaneous adipose derived
from a 60-year-old woman with a BMI of 52.2 kg m ⁻² , showing
co-expression of CD9 ( e ) and CD68 ( f ) cells. Scale bar, 5 µm. The
staining was done on four independent individuals to confirm.

Full size image []

Fig. 2: SVF-derived immune cells.

A large proportion (40%) of the immune cells (IS1, IS4, IS6 and IS8)
were clustered closely together and showed gene expression signatures of
natural killer and T cells. IS1 exhibited selective expression of IL7R ,
which is expressed in naive T cells ¹⁴ . However, unsupervised cell type
definition suggested a mixture of naive and memory CD4 ⁺ and CD8 ⁺ T
cells (Supplementary Table 7 ). Manual annotation of IS4 cells
identified specific expression of GNLY , NKG7 , FGFBP2 , GZMB , GZMH and
CTSW , which indicated that these cells are natural killer cells
(Supplementary Table 8 ). Indeed, this was supported by unsupervised
annotation, which showed that 68% of IS4 cells correlated with the
natural killer cell reference. A recent report found that obesity is
associated with reprogramming of blood-derived natural killer cells,
with upregulation of genes involved in lipid metabolism including CD36
(ref. ¹⁵ ). However, the IS4 natural killer cells identified here did
not express any genes involved in lipid metabolism, suggesting a
different obesity-related effect on natural killer cells, dependent on
resident tissue.

IS6 showed increased expression of CCL5 and IL32 , indicating that these
cells may be activated T cells ¹⁶ ; this was confirmed by the
unsupervised annotation, which revealed that 68% of the cells were
associated with memory CD8 ⁺ T cells. Although a large proportion (59%)
of the IS8 cells were, similarly to IS6 cells, mapped as memory CD8 ⁺ T
cells in our unsupervised annotation we noted in the manual curation
that they showed a unique pattern of high expression of metallothionein
genes ( MT1E , MT1F , MT1G , MT1X and MT2A , Supplementary Table 8 and
Fig. 2c ). We followed up this finding by performing additional
scRNA-seq profiling on CD34 ⁻ sorted SVF cells and found evidence of the
presence of metallothionein-rich T cells in the validation sample
(cluster 7, Supplementary Table 9 and Fig. 2d ); both discovery and
validation samples specifically showed MT1F and MT1G to be uniquely
expressed by this T cell subpopulation (Fig. 2c,d ). Similarly to what
was recently shown for circulating immune cells ¹⁵ , these potential
adipose-resident dysfunctional T cells may be induced by obesity and
therefore enriched in our scRNA study. To test this, we used bulk gene
expression data from two large SAT population-based collections (776
female samples from the MuTHER resource, and 770 male samples from the
METSIM study) that have, in addition to tissue collection, study
subjects deeply phenotyped for obesity-related traits ^(17 , 18) . Here,
we used BMI and dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA)-derived
percentage trunk fat (PTF) in association with the expression of MT1E ,
MT1F , MT1G , MT1X and MT2A (Supplementary Table 10 ). Encouragingly, we
found consistent strong positive associations between the obesity traits
and expression of MT1F , MT1G and MT2A , whereas MT1E and MT1X showed
weaker association or no significant association, in line with our
observations of cell-specific expression of these two genes. Finally, we
found that all metallothionein genes are expressed in adipose tissue
irrespective of tissue depot, with no sex-specific expression pattern
(Supplementary Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 5 ).

Our manual or unsupervised annotation mapped clusters IS2, IS3, IS7, IS9
and IS12 to adipose tissue macrophages (ATMs); the proportion of cells
expressing the classic macrophage marker CD68 ranged from 19% to 52%
(Extended Data Fig. 1a ), with IS2 having the highest expression (52%)
and IS9 the lowest expression (19%). IS2 cells were also enriched with
genes that are involved in lipid metabolism during obesity
(Supplementary Table 8 ), including LIPA , LPL , CD36 and FABP4 ; these
findings are in line with the idea that obesity activates a non-classic
inflammatory phenotype of ATM involving lipid accumulation and
trafficking ¹⁹ . In addition, we found these metabolically active ATMs
(that is, IS2 cells) to have more pronounced expression of CD9 than the
other ATMs (Extended Data Fig. 1a ). We performed cellular phenotyping
by immunohistochemistry and validated the co-expression of CD68 and CD9
in obese adipose tissue (Fig. 2e,f ). We also confirmed ^(17 , 18) the
linear relationship of CD9 expression and BMI in the MuTHER and METSIM
SAT cohorts (MuTHER BMI, P = 2.2 × 10 ⁻¹³ , β = 0.011; METSIM BMI, P
= 9.4 × 10 ⁻²⁸ , β = 0.379).

IS12 and IS3 clusters showed a similar signature to that of IS2, but IS3
cells had increased expression of the inflammatory genes CXCL3 , CXCL2 ,
IL1B , CCL3 and CXCL8 (Extended Data Fig. 1b ). By contrast, IS9 cells
are marked by the expression of FOLR2 and KLF4 , which are known
signatures of M2 macrophages ^(20 , 21) . Finally, although our
unsupervised annotation indicated that IS12 are macrophages, we could
not distinguish them further.

Our unsupervised annotation identified IS5 and IS10 as classic CD16 ⁻
monocytes with high expression of S100A8 , S100A9 and S100A12 in IS10.
However, further literature mining showed that IS5 cells are rather
dendritic cells, owing to their high expression of HLA genes including
HLA-DPB1 , HLA-DQA1 , HLA-DPA1 , HLA-DRA and HLA-DQB1 . IS13 cells
possessed signatures of a newly identified subtype of dendritic cells ²²
with high expression of LST1 , SERPINA1 , AIF1 and FCGR3A .

Finally, we were able to link the IS11 cluster to B cells, owing to
their expression of IGKC , JCHAIN , CD79A and CD37 . The remaining
cluster (IS14) showed mixed signatures in both annotation strategies and
was therefore not explored further.

Identification of adipocyte progenitors derived from different adipose tissue depots

Next, we characterized our progenitor clusters (P1–P7) by studying the
expression pattern of cell surface makers used in FACS of SVF
progenitors ²³ and noted that all clusters seemed to be CD45 ⁻ CD34 ⁺
CD31 ⁻ (Fig. 3a ) with a profound signature in P1–P6. We also noted that
five of the clusters (P2 and P4–P7) were identified to express CFD ²⁴ ,
which encodes the adipokine adipsin, a marker of adipocyte
differentiation (Fig. 3b ); the range of CFD expression observed across
the clusters may therefore be linked to different stages of
adipogenesis. To validate this, we performed in vitro differentiation
studies of human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and identified a 5.6 log
₂ (fold induction) between undifferentiated MSCs (that is, adipogenic
induction control (ACI)) and MSC during adipogenic induction (AI)
(adjusted P = 1.19 × 10 ⁻²⁶ , Fig. 3c ). We further noted that CFD
expression is additionally increased at the first (AD1) and second (AD2)
stages of adipogenesis (AI versus AD1, log ₂ (fold) = 1.3, adjusted P
= 0.012; AI versus AD2, log ₂ (fold) = 1.2, adjusted P = 0.036).
Incorporating this information with our progenitor signature indicated
that P2 and P7 include more mature pre-adipocytes than clusters P4–P6.
We further validated this by unsupervised annotation, which linked on
average 88% of the cells in P2 and P7 to adipocytes compared to an
average of only 70% of cells in P4–P6 (Supplementary Table 11 ).

[figure 3]

a , Violin plots of log-transformed expression density of CD34 (upper
panel), CD31/PECAM1 (middle panel) and CD45/PTPRC (bottom panel) across
all SVF clusters from 25 samples. The width of the violin plot indicates
the number of cells expressing the particular gene. b , Dot plot of the
expression of CFD across progenitor clusters. The size of the dot
corresponds to the percentage of cells expressing CFD in each cluster
and the colour represents the average CFD expression level. c , Boxplot
of CFD expression at four different timepoints of adipocyte
differentiation from MSCs ( n = 8 individuals). AI corresponds to the
first timepoint 3 d after culturing MSCs in the induction medium. AD1
and AD2 correspond to 1 and 2 weeks of differentiation in adipogenic
medium after the AI timepoint. ACI, AC1 and AC2 are the corresponding
control sets for AI, AD1 and AD2 without any adipocyte differentiation
treatments. Each timepoint with corresponding control includes three
independent MSC cultures and is shown by the average log ₂ (read count).
The black line inside the boxplot represents the median value and the
size of the box is determined by the 25th and 75th percentiles of the
data. The whiskers of boxplot represent the maximum and minimum values
of the data shown.

Source data

Full size image []

Fig. 3: SVF-derived progenitor clusters.

We then compared the seven progenitor clusters based on tissue type and
found a striking depot-specific pattern (Fig. 4a ) in which three of the
clusters (P2, P6 and P7) were mainly composed of cells from the SAT,
whereas P1, P3 and P5 included mostly cells from the VAT and only one
cluster of progenitors (P4) included a mixed population of SAT- and
VAT-derived cells. For instance, the VAT-specific clusters P1 and P3
exhibited pronounced expression (average log(fold change) > 1.5) of
omentin ( ITLN1 ) ²⁵ and mesothelin ( MSLN ). Omentin is a VAT-specific
adipocytokine that serves as a biomarker for metabolic diseases ²⁶ and,
together with MSLN , is also a marker of mesothelial cells ²⁷ , in line
with findings that VAT develops from the mesothelium ²⁸ . Additionally,
we identified 16 other genes that characterize P1 and P3 (average
log(fold change) > 1, Supplementary Table 2 ); we followed up these
genes with bulk RNA-seq and found 11 (68%) of them to be differentially
expressed (adjusted P < 0.05 and log(fold change) ≥1) (Supplementary
Table 12 and Fig. 4b ).

[figure 4]

a , Clustering results of all SVF samples that underwent scRNA-seq,
which identified 17 clusters from 26,350 cells. Clusters were classified
as progenitors, immune cells and endothelial cells and labelled
accordingly. Cells are labelled as VAT-derived (red) or SAT-derived
(blue). b , Violin plots of expression density of 11 genes that are
specific to VAT progenitor clusters. The y axis indicates
log-transformed expression values and the width indicates the number of
cells expressing the particular gene.

Full size image []

Fig. 4: Main cell clusters in the SVF based on depot.

To study these cell populations in more detail, we created two subsets
for re-clustering: SAT-derived progenitor cells (SP, n = 5,458) and
VAT-derived progenitor cells (VP, n = 9,847).

Subcutaneous adipocyte progenitors and their role in metabolic conditions

The clustering of the adipocyte progenitors identified five groups
(SP1–SP5, Fig. 5a,b ), all of which expressed CFD . SP1 and SP3 cells
expressed pre-adipocyte or adipose stem cell markers (for example MGP ,
APOD , CXCL14 and WISP2 ), whereas SP2 showed signatures of a more
mature adipocyte progenitor cell (for example APOE , FABP4 , CEBPB and
CD36 ). The SP4 group contained cells expressing genes involved in
fibrosis and extracellular matrix accumulation, including COL3A1 ,
COL6A3 , COL1A1 and COL6A1 . This fibroblast signature was validated by
unsupervised annotation; 69% of the cells were mapped as fibroblasts,
whereas more than 80% of SP1–SP3 cells mapped as adipocytes
(Supplementary Table 13 ). SP5 cells expressed high levels of
inflammatory markers (for example CCL5 , CD3E , IL7R and IL32 ) ,
including CD45/PTPRC (Fig. 5c ), indicating that SP5 cells represent
haematopoietic stem cell (HSC) progenitors.

[figure 5]

a , Re-clustering of SAT-specific progenitors from the complete sample
set of 26,350 cells. b , Re-clustering of SAT-specific progenitors
(2,705 cells) by subsampling the high-coverage library to 1,500 cells. c
, Dot plot of the expression of PTPRC ( CD45 ) and CFD across SAT
progenitors (SP1–SP5). d , Pearson correlation of fasting glucose levels
(mmol l ⁻¹ ) and SP1 proportion across all samples obtained from 13
individuals. e , Dot plot of differentially expressed SP1 genes in cells
derived from T2D (DX) versus non-T2D (NDX) samples previously validated
in the MuTHER study. f , Boxplot of T2D-associated SP1 gene expression
at different timepoints of adipocyte differentiation from MSCs ( n = 8
individuals). AI corresponds to the first timepoint 3 d after culturing
MSCs in the induction medium. AD1 and AD2 correspond to 1 and 2 weeks of
differentiation in adipogenic medium after the AI timepoint. ACI, AC1
and AC2 are the corresponding control sets for AI, AD1 and AD2 without
any adipocyte differentiation treatments. Each timepoint with
corresponding control includes three independent MSC cultures and is
shown by average log ₂ (read count) and error bars corresponding to s.d.
The black line inside the boxplot represents the median value and the
size of the box is determined by the 25th and 75th percentiles of the
data. The wiskers of the boxplot represent the maximum and minimum
values of the data shown. The sizes of the dots in c and e correspond to
the percentage of cells expressing the genes in each cluster and the
colour represents the average expression level.

Source data

Full size image []

Fig. 5: Progenitor clusters specific to the SAT.

We then investigated whether the proportion of adipocyte progenitor
clusters specific to the SAT in each individual sample was associated
with T2D status. We correlated fasting glucose levels with all of the SP
cell proportions and found the abundance of SP1 to be significantly
correlated with glucose levels (Pearson r = 0.56, P = 0.046, Fig. 5d and
Supplementary Table 14 ). We followed up this finding in multiple ways
and provide further evidence of the link between SP1 cells and T2D.
First, we used top differently expressed genes in this group (SP1, n
= 43, adjusted P < 0.01) compared to all other cell types (SP2–SP5,
Supplementary Table 15 ) for disease annotation ( Methods ) and found
T2D as the top annotated disease (Supplementary Table 16 , P = 3.21 × 10
⁻⁶ ). Second, we used the MuTHER resource ¹⁷ followed by the METSIM
Study ¹⁸ for transcription-wide association analysis of multiple
T2D-related traits. We found the SP1 gene set ( n = 43) to be
significantly enriched for association to the T2D traits in both studies
(Supplementary Table 17 ), corresponding to fold changes between 2.5 and
9.4, depending on the trait and study (Fisher’s P = 0.06–7.96 × 10 ⁻⁸ ,
Supplementary Table 18 ). Specifically, the female MuTHER study included
enriched association for 44% of the SP1 genes by using a strict
Bonferroni-corrected study-wise P value threshold of P < 2.53 × 10 ⁻⁶ .
Replication of these genes in the male METSIM study showed strong
correlation of effect sizes across T2D traits (Pearson r = 0.92,
Supplementary Fig. 3 ).

Finally, we went back to our single-cell dataset and performed
differential expression analysis between SP cells from T2D versus
non-T2D samples, as defined by their fasting glycaemia, restricting
analysis to the 19 validated SP1-specific genes (Supplementary Tables 17
, 18 ). We found that 53% of the genes (ten of 19) were also differently
expressed (Bonferroni P < 0.05, Fig. 5e ) in cells based on T2D status
with the same direction of effect as seen in MuTHER (Supplementary Table
19 ). These genes include GPX3 , WISP2 , ATF3 , EIF1 , MGP , TMEM176B ,
CXCL12 , CFH , C1S and ADH1B ²⁹ . The top differentially expressed gene
was GPX3 , with a significantly higher proportion of cells expressing
the gene in non-T2D samples (73%) than in T2D samples (66%) ( P = 1.50 ×
10 ⁻¹⁴ ). In line with these findings, we found GPX3 to be negatively
correlated with Homoeostatic Model Assessment for Insulin Resistance
(HOMA-IR) in both the MuTHER ( β = −0.084, P = 1.03 × 10 ⁻¹¹ ) and
METSIM cohort ( β = −0.147, P = 4.46 × 10 ⁻⁵ ).

We also noted WISP2 among those top ten genes with differential
expression between T2D and non-T2D cells ( P = 3.1 × 10 ⁻⁵ ) but, as
opposed to GPX3 , WISP2 seems to have a negative effect on T2D status.
We found that 72% of T2D cells expressed the gene versus only 52% of the
non-T2D cells. Again, we validated this pattern in the large MuTHER and
METSIM adipose tissue cohorts, with a positive correlation with HOMA-IR
( β = 0.115, P = 2.2 × 10 ⁻²⁰ and β = 0.132, P = 2.3 × 10 ⁻⁴ ,
respectively). We found that, similarly to the results for WISP2 , T2D
cells expressed ATF3 to a greater extent (51%) than non-T2D cells (29%),
and ATF3 was positively correlated to HOMA-IR in MuTHER ( β = 0.079, P
= 2.9 × 10 ⁻²¹ ) and METSIM ( β = 0.102, P = 4.4 × 10 ⁻³ ).

Validation of depot-independent adipocyte progenitors in CD34 ⁺ sorted cells

Clustering of the VP cells resulted in six clusters (Fig. 6a and
Supplementary Table 20 ); cells expressing CFD (referred to as VPC and
corresponding to VP4–VP6) versus MSLN (referred to as VPM and
corresponding to VP1–VP3) were clustered separately (Fig. 6b ). The VPCs
(VP4–VP6) resembled the progenitor types identified in the SAT and may
therefore represent adipocyte progenitors that are present across
depots. Specifically, VP4 included cells enriched for genes such as APOD
, CXCL14 , DPT , GPX3 , MGP , EIF1 , C1S and ADH1B and thus having a
similar expression pattern to that of the T2D-linked SP1 cells. VP5 are
enriched for MFAP5 , which in turn is involved in adipose tissue
remodelling in individuals with obesity ³⁰ . Another notable gene
expressed in cluster VP5 was S100A4 , a biomarker for inhibition of
adipogenesis, associated with reduced obesity and inflammation in
rodents ³¹ . The expression signature of VP5 was similar to the fibrotic
signatures of the cells grouped as SP4. Finally, VP6 is marked by the
expression of TYROBP , HLA-DRA and CD74 ; in general, these cells have
the inflammatory signature identified for the HSC progenitors in SP5.
Taken together, the combined results from our SAT and VAT single-cell
data indicate the presence of three depot-independent cell types:
T2D-associated adipocyte progenitors, fibroblasts and HSC. To provide
further support for these observations, we generated scRNA-seq profiles
of CD34 ⁺ sorted SVF cells ( Methods ). The clustering of these cells
resulted in 13 groups (0–12, Supplementary Fig. 4 and Supplementary
Table 21 ); there was clear evidence for overlapping fibrotic and HSC
properties in two of the clusters. Specifically, we linked cluster 10
(134 cells) to HSC progenitors, which corresponded to 2% of the complete
cell population, concurring with the proportion of cells in the SP5
cluster (3%) from the deep-sequenced sample when restricting to
progenitors only. The expression signature of this cluster also
resembles that of SP5, with PTPRC, CCL5 and IL32 among the top genes
distinguishing these progenitors from the other CD34 ⁺ cell clusters.
Similarly, we found clusters 5 and 7 in the validation sample to have
similar properties to the fibrotic SP4 cluster, including expression of
FBN1 , PI16 and IGFBP6 .

[figure 6]

a , Re-clustering of VAT-specific progenitors (9,847 cells) from the
complete sample set. b , Violin plots showing the expression density of
MSLN and CFD in six VP clusters. The y axis indicates log-transformed
expression values and the width indicates the number of cells expressing
the particular gene. c , VAT progenitor cells labelled based on
mitochondrial gene distribution: group 0 (grey, 5,018 cells) shows cells
with mitochondrial gene expression ≤ 5%, group 1 (blue, 4,100 cells)
represents 6–14% expression and group 2 (red, 729 cells) represents
15–24% expression. See also Supplementary Fig. 5 . d , Pearson
correlation of fasting glucose levels (mmol l ⁻¹ ) and VPM cell
proportion across all samples from 12 individuals. e , Expression
pattern of UCP1 , MSLN and WT1 from bulk RNA-seq showing the change in
expression in mature adipocytes.

Source data

Full size image []

Fig. 6: Progenitor clusters specific to the VAT derived from individuals
with obesity.

Visceral-specific progenitor cells have different origins and mitochondrial activity

In contrast to VPCs, VPM cells seemed to have unique properties specific
to the visceral depot with a signature of mesothelial origin, as
discussed above. Apart from the specific expression of MSLN , the VPM
progenitor cells also expressed the mesothelial adipocyte markers UPK3B
and WT1 (Extended Data Fig. 2 ). Comparing VPC and VPM cells, we also
noted clear differences in mitochondrial gene expression. Specifically,
we found that the VPM cells had comparatively high mitochondrial
expression (that is, 6–20%), whereas VPCs showed a consistent pattern of
low (that is, ≤ 5%) expression of mitochondrial genes (Fig. 6c ). As it
is well known that brown adipocytes contain a higher number of
mitochondria than white adipocytes, this intriguing finding prompted us
to test whether the VPM cells constitute progenitors with
differentiation potential towards beige adipocytes, thus potentially
having a protective function against obesity and insulin resistance. To
test this, we first correlated VPM cell proportion with fasting glucose
levels and found a significant negative correlation (Pearson r = −0.64,
P = 0.025, Fig. 6d ). We also noted that VPM cells expressed PLA2G2A
(VP1, adjusted P = 5.84 × 10 ⁻¹⁰⁹ ), which was recently shown to
activate mitochondrial uncoupling in brown adipose tissue and, in line
with our observations here, provided protection from the deleterious
effects of high-fat diets in mice ³² . In addition, the mitochondrial
marker gene SOD2 (VP3, adjusted P = 2.72 × 10 ⁻²⁴⁵ ), which is
upregulated in beige and brown adipose tissue ³³ compared to white
adipose tissue, was found to be specific to the VPM cells ³⁴ .

Next, we investigated whether this beige adipose signature found among a
subset of the VAT progenitor cells (that is, VPM cells) could be
validated in independent datasets of purified VAT- and SAT-derived
mature adipocytes from the same clinical study population (Supplementary
Table 22 ). Indeed, we noted striking over-representation of not only
the mesothelial markers MSLN (log ₂ (fold) = 1.48, adjusted P = 1.7 × 10
⁻³ ), WT1 (log ₂ (fold) = 2.73, adjusted P = 8.1 × 10 ⁻¹⁰ ) and UPK3B
(log ₂ (fold) = 2.54, adjusted P = 8.3 × 10 ⁻⁹ ) but also the classical
markers for beige and brown adipocytes EBF2 (log ₂ (fold) = 2.39,
adjusted P = 2.1 × 10 ⁻²⁰ ), PRDM16 (log ₂ (fold) = 1.44, adjusted P
= 9.9 × 10 ⁻⁵ ) and UCP1 (log ₂ (fold) = 2.20, adjusted P = 2.3 × 10 ⁻⁷
). However, the progenitor or mature brown adipocyte markers MYF5 (log ₂
(fold) = 0.04, adjusted P = 0.96) or ZIC1 (log ₂ (fold) = −0.01,
adjusted P = 0.98) were not differentially expressed, suggesting that
the VPM cells are not of the brown adipocyte lineage. We then used bulk
SVF and whole tissue from VAT and SAT to validate the induction of UCP1
during differentiation to mature adipocytes; by contrast, the expression
of MSLN and WT1 peaks in progenitors (Fig. 6e ). In addition, we noted a
strong negative correlation in VAT between UCP1 and both mesothelial
markers ( MSLN versus UCP1 , Pearson r = −0.72, P = 0.018 and WT1 versus
UCP1 , Pearson r = −0.72, P = 0.019; Supplementary Fig. 6 ). We also
noted a significant positive correlation between UCP1 and IRX3 in VAT
(Pearson r = 0.85, P = 1.71 × 10 ⁻³ ) in line with recent reports
showing the induction of IRX3 in the browning process of adipocytes ³⁵
(Supplementary Fig. 6 ). Last, in line with our observations of marker
genes characterizing VPM cells, we observed a trend towards SOD2
expression being positively correlated with the expression of UCP1
(Pearson r = 0.56, P = 0.09), further indicating a browning signature of
a subset of VPM-derived adipocytes residing in the visceral depot only.

These several lines of evidence indicate that there are UCP1 ⁺ cells
originating from MSLN - and WT1- expressing progenitors in the VAT, with
the expression of UCP1 peaking in mature adipocytes that underwent
browning. This may explain why we failed to detect any UCP1 -expressing
cells in our large single-cell dataset of VPM progenitors from
individuals with obesity. However, as we observed a negative correlation
between the proportions of VPM cells and metabolic disease status (Fig.
6d ), we proposed that UCP1 -expressing pre-adipocytes derived from VPM
progenitors may be more prevalent in healthy tissue early in
development. To address this, we accessed VAT from a healthy young
donor. We used the subset of CD34 ⁺ cells for clustering (Fig. 7 ) and
confirmed the high abundance of MSLN ⁻ and WT1 ⁻ progenitors in the SVF
derived from VAT. Encouragingly, we also identified a distinct cluster
of cells among the VPM cells that not only expressed UCP1 (Fig. 7c ) but
also had the highest mitochondrial content (Fig. 7d ). Finally, we also
noted SOD2 among the top genes with differential expression between UCP1
-expressing versus non- UCP1- expressing VPM cells (adjusted P = 7.02 ×
10 ⁻⁹³ ), with 95% of UCP1 ⁺ cells expressing the gene versus only 75%
of the UCP1 ⁻ VPM cells. By contrast, as shown above, UCP1 ⁺ cells had
significantly lower expression of WT1 (adjusted P = 4.24 × 10 ⁻⁸ ), with
only 22% of UCP1 ⁺ cells expressing the gene versus 56% of the UCP1 ⁻
VPM cells (Supplementary Table 23 ).

[figure 7]

a , Re-clustering of progenitors identified six clusters comprising
1,781 cells. b , MSLN expression (purple) across progenitor clusters. c
, UCP1 expression across the six clusters of progenitors. d ,
Mitochondrial gene expression across the six clusters of progenitors.

Full size image []

Fig. 7: Progenitor clusters specific to the VAT derived from a healthy
individual.

Discussion

We have performed a large, unbiased assessment of the cellular landscape
in the non-adipocyte fraction of human adipose tissue (known as the
SVF). The corresponding mature adipocyte fraction per depot was studied
in parallel by bulk sequencing approaches, owing to current technical
limitations in profiling large and lipid-rich cells at single-cell
resolution. Study subjects were selected on the basis of obesity-related
metabolic phenotypes, including the presence or absence of T2D, which
allowed the incorporation of differences in cell populations not only
dependent on depot but also on disease status.

Our initial classification resulted in three broad categories of cell
types: progenitors or stem cells, immune cells and endothelial cells.
Endothelial cells represented around 8% of all cells, but distinctive
signatures divided the group further into subpopulations. Although in a
minority, endothelial cells are well known to play an important role in
adipose tissue inflammation (obesity-induced T2D has been associated
with profound dysfunction of endothelial cells) ³⁶ . The largest
population of endothelial cells were characterized as
fatty-acid-handling microvascular endothelial cells because of their
pronounced expression of genes encoding fatty acid transport and binding
proteins. These results are in line with recent work showing the
importance of endothelial fatty acid uptake in adipose tissue,
especially during obesity-induced tissue inflammation ¹² . Another
subpopulation was identified as lymphatic derived, owing to expression
of the lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor ( LYVE1 ) gene.
This is of interest as recent studies have shown the importance of
crosstalk between lymphatic vessels and adipose tissue, and that
lymphatic dysfunction is linked to metabolic diseases ³⁷ . We extend
these efforts and show that the lymphatic vasculature is depot specific,
as the majority of these cells were derived from visceral samples.

Our characterization of adipose-resident immune cells, representing
around 30% of the cells, confirmed the complex nature of obesity-induced
adipose tissue inflammation. We identified 14 different immune cell
types, including T cells, B cells, natural killer cells, dendritic
cells, monocytes and macrophages. T cells, and particularly the CD8 ⁺
subset, play an important role in adipose inflammation; the obese
adipose tissue activates these cells, which then recruit and activate
adipose-resident macrophages ³⁸ . We identified activated memory CD8 ⁺ T
cells expressing CCL5 , which is positively correlated with obesity ³⁹
(increased expression is associated with increased BMI). Interestingly,
we found that a subpopulation of these CD8 ⁺ T cells express
metallothionein with a unique clustering pattern compared to the
activated memory CD8 ⁺ T cells, which may be associated with
obesity-related traits. Specifically, using two large population-based
adipose tissue resources, we found a strong association between the
expression of the cell-specific metallothionein genes MT2A , MT1F and
MT1G and obesity phenotypes, indicating a role for these cells in
adipose dysfunction. This T cell expression profile of metallothionein
genes was recently linked to a novel dysfunctional CD8 ⁺ T cell
population identified in single-cell studies of tumour-infiltrating
lymphocytes ⁴⁰ , in which targeted deletion of the metallothionein genes
resulted in loss of T cell dysfunction. Similarly to Singer et al., we
also found that these metallothionein genes are expressed only in the
potential dysfunctional adipose-resident T cells but not in the
activated memory CD8 ⁺ T cells, and as such break new grounds in
possibly defining the role of T cells in adipose inflammation and
potentially in insulin resistance.

As mentioned above, macrophages are activated by T cells and infiltrate
the adipose tissue, contributing to obesity-related tissue inflammation
and subsequent insulin resistance. Adipose-resident macrophages play a
different key role in energy metabolism, clearance of dead adipocytes
and removal of extracellular lipids ⁴¹ , which are found to be altered
during the development of obesity and insulin resistance. We observed
that, with high expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism during
obesity, the largest macrophage population probably represents the
so-called metabolically active ATMs, which have been associated with a
beneficial role in obesity, including promoting the clearance of dead
adipocytes ⁴² . We further showed that they have selective expression of
CD9 , which suggests that they represent a distinct type of
obesity-related ATMs.

We identified multiple clusters of progenitor cells with clear
expression signatures dependent on cell source (that is, subcutaneous or
visceral). They were further characterized to be at different stages of
adipogenesis, which was marked by a varying degree of CFD expression.
CFD has been identified as a key player in adipogenesis, with knockdown
of the gene inhibiting lipid accumulation and the expression of
adipocyte markers during adipocyte differentiation ⁴³ . By contrast,
overexpression of CFD promotes adipocyte differentiation. We confirmed
the association of CFD expression and adipocyte differentiation with
validation experiments using MSCs that were monitored during
adipogenesis. These stem cells were derived from bone marrow and
cultured in vitro and may therefore possess different properties to
adipose-derived stem cells; however, they were recently shown to have
similar adipogenic differential potential ⁴⁴ . We also show clear
distinction between the subpopulations beyond what has been shown before
⁴⁵ . We identified a subtype of premature adipocytes that are associated
with T2D (individuals with high glucose levels had higher abundance of
this cell type than those with normal glucose levels). We noted that
this T2D-linked cell type was characterized by genes in the PPARγ
pathway, some of which have a protective role against insulin
resistance. One of those key protective genes was GPX3 , which had
significantly higher expression in cells derived from individuals
without diabetes. T2D-associated oxidative stress can be reversed by
PPARγ-mediated antioxidant regulation through the expression of GPX3
(ref . ⁴⁶ ). Furthermore, PPARγ agonists such as thiazolidinediones,
which are commonly used to treat T2D (although not in our samples),
induce these antioxidant effects, resulting in increased expression of
GPX3 . By contrast, we also found genes expressed by these
T2D-associated cells that had a seemingly negative effect on T2D status,
including WISP2 and ATF3 . The expression of these genes was
significantly higher in T2D cells, and a larger proportion of T2D cells
expressed the genes than non-T2D cells. WISP2 is an adipokine and,
although one of its key functions is to regulate adipogenic commitment
and PPARγ activation, our results confirm previous findings that it can
also induce insulin resistance, probably through the inhibition of
adipocyte recruitment and promotion of hypertrophic obesity ⁴⁷ . ATF3
inhibits PPARγ-mediated transactivation ⁴⁸ and hepatic ATF3 expression
is associated with T2D ⁴⁹ ; as such, ATF3 , similarly to GPX3 , may
serve as a potential therapeutic target for the reduction of insulin
resistance.

Finally, although our depot-specific analysis confirmed earlier findings
that visceral-derived adipocyte progenitors originate from the
mesothelium ²⁸ , we provide additional support to the idea that a subset
of these are also probably inducible by environmental stimuli and may
differentiate into beige pre-adipocytes. For instance, we noted that the
visceral-specific VPM cells, although CD34 ⁺ WT1 ⁺ , did not express
MYF5 , suggesting that, rather than being classic brown pre-adipocytes,
they are more likely to be induced and could be consistent with
so-called beige adipocyte progenitors ⁵⁰ . Although the physiological
importance of such beige adipocyte progenitors in the VAT of individuals
with morbid obesity is uncertain, they may represent a compensatory
mechanism to reduce the adverse effects of obesity. This idea is
supported by our finding of over-representation of this particular cell
population in non-insulin-resistant and healthy subjects.

We acknowledge that a limitation of our study is the focus on
individuals with obesity and that further studies are needed to compare
these results with the cellular architecture in adipose tissue derived
from healthy individuals. However, as there are clear depot- and
region-specific differences in cellular distributions, single-cell
profiling spanning healthy and obese individuals would require a
surgical procedure common in the general population so that tissue can
be obtained for research purposes.

In conclusion, we show the richness of the cellular contribution in
human adipose tissue with multiple subpopulations of immune cells,
endothelial cells, fibroblasts and progenitors. Investigation of the
non-adipocyte fraction of adipose tissue at the single-cell level
suggests that the development of obesity and T2D could be a joint action
of subpopulations of different cell types with altered functions
residing in the adipose tissue.

Methods

Study subjects

Participants were selected through an institutionally approved biobank
infrastructure with ongoing recruitment at the Quebec Heart and Lung
Institute (IUCPQ, Université Laval, Quebec City, Canada). Inclusion and
exclusion criteria were those related to bariatric surgery.
Specifically, men and women who had a BMI ≥ 40 kg m ⁻² or ≥ 35 kg m ⁻²
with major comorbidities, who required surgery and who met the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) Guidelines for bariatric surgery were invited
to participate. Exclusion criteria were general contra-indications for
bariatric surgery, a BMI < 35 kg m ⁻² , age under 18 or over 60 years,
abnormal bowel habits including irritable bowel syndrome, pregnancy,
cirrhosis, inflammatory bowel disease and previous bariatric surgery.
Participants were further selected based on the presence of a signed
consent form and availability of T2D status, with subgroups (that is,
with or without T2D) were matched for BMI, age and male:female ratio as
much as possible.

For the discovery cohort used for scRNA-seq, we identified 14
individuals (four men and ten women) using the above-described inclusion
criteria; five individuals were diagnosed with type 2 diabetes and nine
individuals did not have type 2 diabetes. Detailed clinical information
is provided in Table 1 . For single-cell expression validation, two
additional individuals were identified using the same selection
criteria, including one 35-year-old man without type 2 diabetes with a
BMI of 59 kg m ⁻² and one 42-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes with a
BMI of 44.8 kg m ⁻² .

For validation studies using bulk SVF and adipocyte samples, we
identified 13 independent individuals from the same study population.
This sample set included 12 women and one man with a BMI range from 39.7
to 59.2 kg m ⁻² and age values ranging from 29 to 60 years. Six of these
individuals were diagnosed with T2D and six were not. Similarly, for
validation studies using bulk adipose tissue samples, we identified
another set of ten independent individuals with BMI between 35.5 and
71.8 kg m ⁻² , age between 42 and 49 years and a male:female ratio of
1:1.

For all sample sets, adipose tissue was collected during the bariatric
surgery from two different fat compartments: the greater omentum,
corresponding to VAT, and the abdominal subcutaneous fat compartment
(SAT). Informed consent was obtained from each participant through the
management of the framework of the Quebec Heart and Lung Institute
Obesity Biobank. The protocol was approved by the Research Ethics
Committee of the IUCPQ (protocol number 21320).

Sample preparation

SVF and mature adipocytes were obtained as follows: adipose tissue was
digested within 30 min of collection with collagenase according to a
modification of the Robdell method ⁵¹ . Briefly, adipose tissue samples
were digested with collagenase type 1 in Krebs-Ringer-Henseleit (KRH)
buffer for 45 min at 37 °C. Cell suspensions containing mature
adipocytes and SVF were then filtered with a nylon mesh and washed three
times with KRH buffer. The buoyancy of adipocytes allows them to float
to the surface. Mature adipocytes were divided into aliquots, and the
remaining solution containing the SVF was centrifuged at 1,500 r.p.m.
for 5 min. The pellet was washed with pre-adipocyte growth medium (PGM)
(DMEM-F12 supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin–streptomycin, 17 µM
pantothenic acid, 33 µM biotin, 100 µM ascorbic acid and 2.5 µm ml ⁻¹
amphoB) followed by a second centrifugation. SVF cells were then
cryopreserved using freezing medium (PGM supplemented with 40% FBS and
10% DMSO). The medium was added to the pellet and frozen with a
temperature gradient (−1 °C per min) and stored in liquid nitrogen until
analysis. Whole adipose tissue samples were quickly frozen in liquid
nitrogen following collection and stored until analysis.

Isolation of CD34 ⁺ CD34 ⁻ SVF cells by FACS

Cells from the SVF were thawed and suspended in PBS with 0.1% BSA. They
were centrifuged at 1,500 r.p.m. for 5 min. Erythrocyte lysis buffer was
added for 5 min to the suspension to remove red blood cells. The
suspension was centrifuged again at 1,500 r.p.m. for 5 min. Primary
antibody ( CD34 , PE, eBioscience) was added to the samples and
incubated for 60 min at 4 °C in the dark. PBS with 0.1% BSA was added to
wash the suspension followed by 80 µm filtration with a nylon mesh to
remove debris. The suspension was then transferred to a 10 ml
polypropylene tube, centrifuged at 1,500 r.p.m. for 5 min and the pellet
was suspended in PBS with 0.1% BSA. Viability staining solution was
added 15 min before the sorting process. Viability control was performed
with live and dead cells to ascertain that the staining solution worked
well, and for gate adjustment. OneComp Ebeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
control was also used to provide a positive and negative control for the
antibody. The samples were sorted with the BD FACSAria II (BD
Biosciences) with the following parameters: cell size, graininess,
viability, singlet cell and CD34 ⁺ CD34 ⁻ .

Dead and non-singlet cells were automatically discarded. Cells that were
positive and negative for CD34 were collected in two distinct tubes
(Supplementary Fig. 7 ). After sorting, cells were centrifuged at
1,500 r.p.m. for 5 min and were conserved in freezing medium as
described above and stored at −80 °C until further analysis.

MSC culture and differentiation

Bone-marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (LY-MSCs) from eight
healthy 19–27 year-old female donors were provided by the GMP facility
of the Advanced Cell Therapy Centre, Finnish Red Cross Blood Service
(FRCBS), Helsinki, Finland. The cells were thawed, expanded and
differentiated into adipocytes following the FRCBS protocol published
previously ⁵² . Briefly, in preparation for adipogenic differentiation,
cells at passage number three were plated in 10 cm cell culture plates
(Corning) and grown in expansion medium containing low-glucose DMEM
(Thermo Fisher Scientific), 100 units per ml penicillin and 100 μg ml ⁻¹
streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 10% Stemulate (pooled human
platelet lysate culture media supplement, Cook Regentec) until they
reached 70–90% confluence (timepoint 1), at which point the medium was
changed to adipogenic basal medium containing alpha-MEM GlutaMAX, 10%
FBS, 20 mM HEPES, 100 units per ml penicillin and 100 μg ml ⁻¹
streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Half of the culture plates were
used as controls and maintained in the adipogenic basal medium until
harvesting. The other half was subjected to adipogenic differentiation.
More specifically, the cells were first incubated for 3–4 days in
adipogenic basal medium supplemented with the induction cocktail of
0.1 mM indomethacin (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.5 μg ml ⁻¹ insulin, 0.2 mM
3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) and 0.4 μg ml ⁻¹ dexamethasone
(Preadipocyte Differentiation Medium Supplement Pack, PromoCell)
(timepoint 2); the medium was then changed to the terminal
differentiation cocktail containing 0.1 mM indomethacin (Sigma-Aldrich),
0.5 μg ml ⁻¹ insulin and 3 μg ml ⁻¹ ciglitazone (PromoCell). The medium
was changed twice a week for all plates and the differentiation was
allowed to proceed for 3 weeks for timepoint 3 or 4 weeks for timepoint
4. For each donor, samples were harvested at timepoint 1
(non-differentiated cells), timepoint 2 (adipocyte-induced control
without drugs in the media or differentiated with induction drugs),
timepoint 3 (adipocyte control without drugs in the media or
differentiated with drugs) and timepoint 4 (adipocyte control without
drugs in the media or differentiated with drugs).

scRNA-seq

Cells from the SVF were thawed and serially diluted in DMEM/F12
supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin–streptomycin in a 15 ml
conical tube to a volume of 14 ml. They were centrifuged at 300 r.c.f.
for 10 min and the supernatant was removed and discarded. The pelleted
cells were suspended in an adequate amount of DMEM/F12 supplemented with
10% FBS and 1% penicillin–streptomycin and transferred to a 1.5 ml
microfuge tube for counting. To determine the volume of suspension to be
used in the 10x Chromium Single Cell Library protocol, 10 µl of the
suspension was used for a cell count and viability assay on a Countess
II Automated Cell Counter (Invitrogen). The desired number of viable
cells to be loaded onto the Chromium Single Cell A Chip (10x Genomics)
was 12,000 cells. After cell capture, the remaining cells were
centrifuged at 300 r.c.f. for 10 min and cryopreserved using freezing
medium (Recovery Cell Culture Freezing Medium, Thermo Fisher
Scientific). The cells were suspended in freezing medium and frozen with
a temperature gradient of −1 °C per min. Cell capture, complementary DNA
amplification and library preparation were performed using the Chromium
Single Cell 3′ Library & Gel Bead Kit v2 (10x Genomics), according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. The final libraries were analysed using a
TapeStation (Agilent) to determine library size and a Qubit Broad Range
dsDNA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to determine library
concentration and sequenced using Illumina HiSeq at high depth (mean
171,560 reads per cell), capturing on average 1,527 cells per sample.

Bulk RNA sequencing

A total of 0.5–3 million cells were re-suspended in 500 µl TRIzol
reagent and total RNA was extracted using the miRNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA library preparations were
carried out on 500 ng of RNA with an RNA integrity number greater than
seven using the Illumina TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Sample Preparation
Kit (Illumina), according to manufacturer’s protocol. Final libraries
were analysed on a Bioanalyzer (Agilent) and sequenced on the Illumina
HiSeq 2500 (Illumina, pair-ended 100–150 bp sequences). On average
61,222,621, 49,175,966, 66,301,281 and 84,454,561 paired-end reads were
sequenced in adipocytes, SVF, adipose tissue and MSCs, respectively.

Quality control and clustering of single-cell data from the SVF

Initial analysis of the single-cell libraries was done using cellranger
v.2.1.0 from 10x Genomics. GRCh38 was used as the genome reference. The
analysis was started with 26 samples. All sequenced samples were
aggregated using the cellranger aggr pipeline, where read depth
difference between libraries was normalized by subsampling higher-depth
libraries. Seurat ⁵³ was used for further analysis of clustering,
dimensionality reduction and differential gene expression. For
filtering, we used only cells with a minimum gene count of 200 and a
maximum of 2,500 genes per cell based on their distribution in the
sample. We also removed cells with less than 200 and greater than 13,750
unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) per cell. Cells with mitochondrial
gene expression greater than 20% were also removed. However, clustering
showed that the majority of the cells (90%) from one sample were
clustered together apart from the clusters of all the other samples. The
sample was removed the and analysis was repeated.

The final input data to Seurat consisted of 38,170 cells, and after
filtering we obtained 26,350 cells. 11,111 cells were removed because of
a low gene or UMI count. We regressed out the variability due to UMI
distribution, mitochondrial gene expression and the difference between
G2M and S phase scores based on the gene expression of cell cycle genes
⁵⁴ . The top 23 dimensions were used to generate the final clusters
using principal component analysis (PCA) and graph-based clustering. The
top 100 genes in each cluster were identified in comparison with all
other cells using the function ‘FindAllMarkers’ in Seurat while keeping
a cutoff of padj ≤ 0.01. Genes expressed in a minimum of 25% of cells in
either of the test populations were considered for analysis. Clusters
were annotated using overlapping known marker genes among the
cluster-specific genes. Differential gene expression analysis between
cell populations was done using the Wilcoxon rank sum test in
‘FindMarkers’ function. The raw expression data of the filtered cells
used in clustering of Seurat was used for generating annotation using
SingleR with default parameters ⁵⁵ . The annotation for each cell was
then overlapped with Seurat cluster identities to identify the cell type
of each cluster. The subsets for the VAT progenitors and immune clusters
were created from the clustering results using the ‘SubsetData’ function
of Seurat. The top ten and 15 dimensions were used for clustering VAT
progenitors and immune cells, respectively, using highly variable genes
in the corresponding data.

The sample with highest number of cells captured ( n = 6,672) is
randomly subsampled to 1,500 cells to match the cell counts of remaining
samples. The clustering was repeated using the same settings as that of
the initial analysis. A subset of SAT progenitors (P2, P4, P6 and P7)
was created. Cells from the VAT that were included in the subset were
removed and we obtained 2,705 that were from SAT progenitors. The top
variable genes were identified and clustering was done using the top ten
dimensions. The cluster-specific genes were used for functional
annotation using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8 (ref. ^(56 , 57) ).

Differential gene expression analysis using bulk RNA

Raw reads were trimmed for quality (phred33 ≥ 30) and length ( n ≥ 32),
and Illumina adapters were clipped off using Trimmomatic v.0.35 (ref. ⁵⁸
). Filtered reads were then aligned to the GRCh38 human reference using
STAR v.2.5.3a ⁵⁹ . Raw read counts of genes were obtained using
htseq-count v.0.6.0 (ref. ⁶⁰ ). Differential gene expression analysis
was done using DeSeq2 v.1.18.1 (ref. ⁶¹ ).

The gene raw count table (V6p) of RNA-seq data was downloaded from the
GTEx web portal. The subset of data was then created by selecting only
tissues of interest based on the sample attribute file provided in the
GTEx portal. Differential expression gene analysis was done using DeSeq2
v.1.18.1.

Detection of CD9 ⁺ CD68 ⁺ macrophages by histological immunofluorescence

VAT and SAT samples from four patients undergoing bariatric surgery were
identified, two of whom were diagnosed with type 2 diabetes. The mean
age was 47.3 years (standard deviation (SD) = 11.7), and the mean BMI
was 49.9 kg m ⁻² (SD = 5.2). Adipose tissue slides were disembedded by
xylene (2 × 10 min) followed by a rehydration step using ethanol
(2 × 5 min 100% ethanol, and 2 × 5 min 95% ethanol). Antigen retrieval
was performed using citrate buffer 0.01 M (0.1 M citric acid with 0.1
sodium citrate mixed with water) for 5 min at 65 °C and 10 min at 95 °C.
The final rehydration step was performed by immersion of the slides for
5 min in water and for 5 min in PBS. Non-specific sites were blocked for
at least 45 min using 1× PBS, 0.1% BSA, 0.4% Triton X-100 and 10% goat
serum. The slides were incubated with the primary antibodies rabbit
anti-human CD9 (PA5-11556, Invitrogen) and mouse anti-human CD68 (ab955,
Abcam) overnight at 4 °C in a humidified chamber. The slides were then
washed three times in 1× PBS for 5 min. The slides were then incubated
with the secondary antibodies goat anti-rabbit Alexa488 (A11008,
Invitrogen) and goat anti-mouse Alexa594 (A11005, Invitrogen) for 2 h at
room temperature in the dark. The slides were then washed three times
with 1× PBS for 5 min. Vectashield mounting medium with DAPI (H-1200,
Vector Laboratories) was used and the coverslip was sealed with nail
polish. Digital images were taken using a Zeiss LSM800 confocal system
(Zeiss). Images were taken at ×20 and ×63 magnification. The slides were
stored at 4 °C in the dark and imaged less than 4 days after staining.

Validation of beige adipocyte signatures by single-cell sequencing

Adipose tissue was collected from a 15-month-old boy undergoing inguinal
hernia repair at Children’s Mercy Kansas City, Missouri, USA. Consent
was obtained through the management of the study protocol approved by
the Institutional Review Board at Children’s Mercy Kansas City (protocol
number 17110653). An easily accessible portion of the greater omentum at
the lower end of the omental drape was identified, a portion was pulled
out and a 2 cm segment was amputated to allow for areas of cautery
changes to be discarded. The specimen was transported in a jar
containing saline. Adipose tissue was then prepared as described above
to obtain the SVF. The SVF pellet was treated with ACK lysis buffer at
room temperature (22 °C) for 5 min, and this was followed by another
centrifugation step at 300 r.c.f. at 10 min. The ACK lysis buffer was
removed from the pellet and the cells were washed once more with HBSS,
200 µM adenosine and 2% FBS, and centrifuged one final time at 300
r.c.f. at 10 min. Cells were counted to determine the total number of
cells in suspension and cell viability. Cells were then cryopreserved
using freezing medium (Gibco Recovery Cell Culture Freezing Medium, 10%
DMSO). The medium was added to the pellet and was frozen with a
temperature gradient (−1 °C per min) and stored in liquid nitrogen until
analysis. At the time of single-cell analysis, cells from the SVF were
thawed and prepared as described above, including a cell count and
viability assay on a Countess II Automated Cell Counter (Invitrogen) to
determine the volume of suspension to be used in the 10x Chromium Single
Cell Library protocol. The desired number of viable cells to be loaded
onto two wells of a Chromium Single Cell A Chip (10x Genomics) was 8,000
cells for a total of two captures with 4,000 cells per capture. Cell
capture, cDNA amplification and library preparation were performed using
the Chromium Single Cell 3′ Library & Gel Bead Kit v2 (10x Genomics),
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The final two libraries were
analysed using a TapeStation to determine library size and a Qubit Broad
Range dsDNA assay to determine library concentration and sequenced on an
Illumina NovaSeq6000 instrument (Illumina). For QC and clustering, we
followed same procedure used for the discovery samples to analyse the
validation sample. However, for filtering, we used only cells with a
minimum gene count of 200 and a maximum of 6,000 genes per cell based on
their distribution in the sample. We also removed cells with more than
50,000 UMIs. Cells with mitochondrial gene expression greater than 40%
were also removed. After filtering we used 2,779 cells for further
clustering and analysis. The top 55 dimensions were used to generate the
final clusters using PCA and graph-based clustering. The subsets for the
progenitors were created from the clustering results using the
‘SubsetData’ function of Seurat. The top 50 dimensions were used for
clustering VAT progenitors using highly variable genes in the
corresponding data.

Gene expression analysis in population-based cohorts

Associations between gene expression levels (IlluminaHT12) and
phenotypes within the MuTHER cohort were modelled using a linear
mixed-effects model as described previously ¹⁷ . Briefly, the lmer
function in the lme4 package, was fitted by maximum-likelihood. The
linear mixed-effects model was adjusted for age and experimental batch
(fixed effects) and family relationship (twin-pairing) and zygosity
(random effects). A likelihood ratio test was used to assess the
significance of the phenotype effect. The P value of the phenotype
effect in each model was calculated from the χ ² distribution with 1
degree of freedom using −2log(likelihood ratio) as the test statistic.
Summary statistics from associations between gene expression levels and
phenotypes within the METSIM cohort were obtained from METSIM study ¹⁸ .

Reporting Summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Data availability

Raw data files from single-cell and bulk RNA-seq used in this study are
uploaded in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) in a SuperSeries with
accession number: GSE136230 . The expression data from the MuTHER cohort
have been deposited in the ArrayExpress (
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/ ) with accession number E-TABM-1140
. Source data are available online for Figs. 3 , 5 and 6 , and
Supplementary Fig. 6 .

References

1.  Tchernof, A. & Despres, J. P. Pathophysiology of human visceral
    obesity: an update. Physiol. Rev 93 , 359–404 (2013).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

2.  Porter, S. A. et al. Abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue: a
    protective fat depot? Diabetes Care 32 , 1068–1075 (2009).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

3.  Laforest, S., Labrecque, J., Michaud, A., Cianflone, K. &
    Tchernof, A. Adipocyte size as a determinant of metabolic disease
    and adipose tissue dysfunction. Crit. Rev. Clin. Lab. Sci. 52 ,
    301–313 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

4.  Denis, G. V. & Obin, M. S. ‘Metabolically healthy obesity’: origins
    and implications. Mol. Aspects Med. 34 , 59–70 (2013).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

5.  Michaud, A. et al. Relevance of omental pericellular adipose tissue
    collagen in the pathophysiology of human abdominal obesity and
    related cardiometabolic risk. Int. J. Obes. (Lond) 40 , 1823–1831
    (2016).

    Article CAS Google Scholar

6.  Schipper, H. S., Prakken, B., Kalkhoven, E. & Boes, M. Adipose
    tissue-resident immune cells: key players in immunometabolism.
    Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 23 , 407–415 (2012).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

7.  Nawaz, A. et al. CD206(+) M2-like macrophages regulate systemic
    glucose metabolism by inhibiting proliferation of adipocyte
    progenitors. Nat. Commun. 8 , 286 (2017).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

8.  Olsen, T. K. & Baryawno, N. Introduction to Single-Cell RNA
    Sequencing. Curr. Protoc. Mol. Biol . 122 , e57 (2018).

    Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar

9.  Schwalie, P. C. et al. A stromal cell population that inhibits
    adipogenesis in mammalian fat depots. Nature 559 , 103–108 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

10. Helper, C. et al. Identification of functionally distinct
    fibro-inflammatory and adipogenic stromal subpopulations in visceral
    adipose tissue of adult mice. eLife 7 , e39636 (2018).

    Article Google Scholar

11. Ehrlund, A. et al. The cell-type specific transcriptome in human
    adipose tissue and influence of obesity on adipocyte progenitors.
    Sci. Data 4 , 170164 (2017).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

12. Briot, A. et al. Senescence alters PPARγ (peroxisome
    proliferator-activated receptor gamma)-dependent fatty acid handling
    in human adipose tissue microvascular endothelial cells and favors
    inflammation. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 38 , 1134–1146
    (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

13. Banerji, S. et al. LYVE-1, a new homologue of the CD44 glycoprotein,
    is a lymph-specific receptor for hyaluronan. J. Cell Biol. 144 ,
    789–801 (1999).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

14. Schluns, K. S., Kieper, W. C., Jameson, S. C. & Lefrancois, L.
    Interleukin-7 mediates the homeostasis of naive and memory CD8 T
    cells in vivo. Nat. Immunol. 1 , 426–432 (2000).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

15. Michelet, X. et al. Metabolic reprogramming of natural killer cells
    in obesity limits antitumor responses. Nat. Immunol. 19 , 1330–1340
    (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

16. Schall, T. J. et al. A human T cell-specific molecule is a member of
    a new gene family. J. Immunol. 141 , 1018–1025 (1988).

    CAS PubMed Google Scholar

17. Small, K. S. et al. Identification of an imprinted master trans
    regulator at the KLF14 locus related to multiple metabolic
    phenotypes. Nat. Genet. 43 , 561–564 (2011).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

18. Civelek, M. et al. Genetic regulation of adipose gene expression and
    cardio-metabolic traits. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 100 , 428–443 (2017).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

19. Kratz, M. et al. Metabolic dysfunction drives a mechanistically
    distinct proinflammatory phenotype in adipose tissue macrophages.
    Cell Metab. 20 , 614–625 (2014).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

20. Jager, N. A. et al. Folate receptor-β imaging using ^(99m) Tc-folate
    to explore distribution of polarized macrophage populations in human
    atherosclerotic plaque. J. Nucl. Med. 55 , 1945–1951 (2014).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

21. Liao, X. et al. Kruppel-like factor 4 regulates macrophage
    polarization. J. Clin. Invest. 121 , 2736–2749 (2011).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

22. Villani, A. C. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals new types of human
    blood dendritic cells, monocytes, and progenitors. Science 356 ,
    eaah4573 (2017).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

23. Acosta, J. R. et al. Increased fat cell size: a major phenotype of
    subcutaneous white adipose tissue in non-obese individuals with type
    2 diabetes. Diabetologia 59 , 560–570 (2016).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

24. Ribeiro, R. et al. Human periprostatic white adipose tissue is rich
    in stromal progenitor cells and a potential source of prostate tumor
    stroma. Exp. Biol. Med. (Maywood) 237 , 1155–1162 (2012).

    Article CAS Google Scholar

25. Yang, R. Z. et al. Identification of omentin as a novel
    depot-specific adipokine in human adipose tissue: possible role in
    modulating insulin action. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 290 ,
    E1253–E1261 (2006).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

26. de Souza Batista, C. M. et al. Omentin plasma levels and gene
    expression are decreased in obesity. Diabetes 56 , 1655–1661 (2007).

    Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar

27. Watanabe, T., Watanabe-Kominato, K., Takahashi, Y., Kojima, M. &
    Watanabe, R. Adipose tissue-derived omentin-1 function and
    regulation. Compr. Physiol. 7 , 765–781 (2017).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

28. Chau, Y. Y. et al. Visceral and subcutaneous fat have different
    origins and evidence supports a mesothelial source. Nat. Cell Biol.
    16 , 367–375 (2014).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

29. Winnier, D. A. et al. Transcriptomic identification of ADH1B as a
    novel candidate gene for obesity and insulin resistance in human
    adipose tissue in Mexican Americans from the Veterans Administration
    Genetic Epidemiology Study (VAGES). PLoS One 10 , e0119941 (2015).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

30. Vaittinen, M. et al. MFAP5 is related to obesity-associated adipose
    tissue and extracellular matrix remodeling and inflammation. Obesity
    (Silver Spring) 23 , 1371–1378 (2015).

    Article CAS Google Scholar

31. Hou, S. et al. S100A4 protects mice from high-fat diet-induced
    obesity and inflammation. Lab. Invest. 98 , 1025–1038 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

32. Kuefner, M. S. et al. Secretory phospholipase A2 group IIA modulates
    insulin sensitivity and metabolism. J. Lipid. Res. 58 , 1822–1833
    (2017).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

33. Perdikari, A. et al. BATLAS: deconvoluting brown adipose tissue.
    Cell Rep. 25 , 784–797 e784 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

34. Wankhade, U. D. et al. TGF-β receptor 1 regulates progenitors that
    promote browning of white fat. Mol. Metab. 16 , 160–171 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

35. Zou, Y. et al. IRX3 promotes the browning of white adipocytes and
    its rare variants are associated with human obesity risk.
    EBioMedicine 24 , 64–75 (2017).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

36. Roberts, A. C. & Porter, K. E. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of
    endothelial dysfunction in diabetes. Diab. Vasc. Dis. Res. 10 ,
    472–482 (2013).

    Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar

37. Escobedo, N. & Oliver, G. The lymphatic vasculature: Its role in
    adipose metabolism and obesity. Cell Metab. 26 , 598–609 (2017).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

38. Nishimura, S. et al. CD8 ⁺ effector T cells contribute to macrophage
    recruitment and adipose tissue inflammation in obesity. Nat. Med. 15
    , 914–920 (2009).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

39. Wu, H. et al. T-cell accumulation and regulated on activation,
    normal T cell expressed and secreted upregulation in adipose tissue
    in obesity. Circulation 115 , 1029–1038 (2007).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

40. Singer, M. et al. A distinct gene module for dysfunction uncoupled
    from activation in tumor-infiltrating T cells. Cell 166 , 1500–1511
    e1509 (2016).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

41. Russo, L. & Lumeng, C. N. Properties and functions of adipose tissue
    macrophages in obesity. Immunology 155 , 407–417 (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

42. Coats, B. R. et al. Metabolically activated adipose tissue
    macrophages perform detrimental and beneficial functions during
    diet-induced obesity. Cell Rep . 20 , 3149–3161 (2017).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

43. Song, N. J. et al. Small molecule-induced complement factor D
    (Adipsin) promotes lipid accumulation and adipocyte differentiation.
    PLoS One 11 , e0162228 (2016).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

44. Li, C. Y. et al. Comparative analysis of human mesenchymal stem
    cells from bone marrow and adipose tissue under xeno-free conditions
    for cell therapy. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 6 , 55 (2015).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

45. Acosta, J. R. et al. Single cell transcriptomics suggest that human
    adipocyte progenitor cells constitute a homogeneous cell population.
    Stem Cell Res. Ther. 8 , 250 (2017).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

46. Chung, S. S. et al. Glutathione peroxidase 3 mediates the
    antioxidant effect of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ
    in human skeletal muscle cells. Mol. Cell Biol. 29 , 20–30 (2009).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

47. Hammarstedt, A. et al. WISP2 regulates preadipocyte commitment and
    PPARγ activation by BMP4. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110 , 2563–2568
    (2013).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

48. Jang, M. K. & Jung, M. H. ATF3 inhibits PPARγ-stimulated
    transactivation in adipocyte cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
    456 , 80–85 (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

49. Kim, J. Y. et al. Activating transcription factor 3 is a target
    molecule linking hepatic steatosis to impaired glucose
    homeostasis. J. Hepatol. 67 , 349–359 (2017).

    Article PubMed Google Scholar

50. Wu, J. et al. Beige adipocytes are a distinct type of thermogenic
    fat cell in mouse and human. Cell 150 , 366–376 (2012).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

51. Tchernof, A. et al. Regional differences in adipose tissue
    metabolism in women: minor effect of obesity and body fat
    distribution. Diabetes 55 , 1353–1360 (2006).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

52. Laitinen, A. et al. A robust and reproducible animal serum-free
    culture method for clinical-grade bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
    stromal cells. Cytotechnology 68 , 891–906 (2016).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

53. Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R.
    Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across different
    conditions, technologies, and species. Nat. Biotechnol. 36 , 411–420
    (2018).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

54. Tirosh, I. et al. Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of
    metastatic melanoma by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 352 , 189–196
    (2016).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

55. Aran, D. et al. Reference-based analysis of lung single-cell
    sequencing reveals a transitional profibrotic macrophage. Nat.
    Immunol. 20 , 163–172 (2019).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

56. Huang da, W., Sherman, B. T. & Lempicki, R. A. Systematic and
    integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID bioinformatics
    resources. Nat. Protoc. 4 , 44–57 (2009).

    Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar

57. Huang da, W., Sherman, B. T. & Lempicki, R. A. Bioinformatics
    enrichment tools: paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis
    of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res . 37 , 1–13 (2009).

    Article PubMed CAS Google Scholar

58. Bolger, A. M., Lohse, M. & Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: a flexible
    trimmer for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics 30 , 2114–2120
    (2014).

    Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar

59. Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner.
    Bioinformatics 29 , 15–21 (2013).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

60. Anders, S., Pyl, P. T. & Huber, W. HTSeq–a Python framework to work
    with high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31 , 166–169
    (2015).

    Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar

61. Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold
    change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol . 15
    , 550 (2014).

    Article PubMed PubMed Central CAS Google Scholar

Download references []

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by a Canadian Institute of Health Research
(CIHR) team grant awarded to E.G. (EGM141898) and the CIHR-funded
Epigenome Mapping Centre at McGill University (EP1-120608) awarded to
T.P. E.G. holds the Roberta D. Harding & William F. Bradley, Jr. Endowed
Chair in Genomic Research and T.P. holds the Dee Lyons/Missouri Endowed
Chair in Pediatric Genomic Medicine. A.T. is the director of a Research
Chair in Bariatric and Metabolic Surgery. M.C.V. is the recipient of the
Canada Research Chair in Genomics Applied to Nutrition and Metabolic
Health (tier 1). The MuTHER study was funded by a program grant from the
Wellcome Trust (081917/Z/07/Z) and core funding for the Wellcome Trust
Centre for Human Genetics (090532). The TwinsUK study was funded by the
Wellcome Trust and European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013). The TwinsUK study also receives support from the
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)-funded BioResource,
Clinical Research Facility and Biomedical Research Centre based at Guy’s
and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust in partnership with King’s College
London. The authors thank M. Korhonen and M. Ahti at the Finnish Red
Cross Blood Service, Helsinki, Finland, for valuable help in this study.
The GTEx Project was supported by the Common Fund of the Office of the
Director of the NIH, and by the National Cancer Institute (NCI),
National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), National Heart, Lung
and Blood Institute (NHLBI), National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA),
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and National Institue of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS). The data used for the
analyses described in this manuscript were obtained from the dbGaP
accession number phs000424.v7.p2 on 7 October 2019.

Author information

Authors and Affiliations

1.  Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Québec,
    Canada

    Jinchu Vijay & Guillaume Bourque

2.  McGill University and Genome Québec Innovation Centre, Montreal,
    Québec, Canada

    Jinchu Vijay, Albena Pramatarova, Marie-Michelle Simon, Haig
    Djambazian, Alfredo Staffa & Guillaume Bourque

3.  Québec Heart and Lung Institute, Université Laval, Québec, Québec,
    Canada

    Marie-Frédérique Gauthier, Laurent Biertho & André Tchernof

4.  Center for Pediatric Genomic Medicine, Children’s Mercy Kansas City,
    Kansas City, MO, USA

    Rebecca L. Biswell, Daniel A. Louiselle, Jeffrey J.
    Johnston, Warren A. Cheung, Bradley Belden, Margaret Gibson, Tomi
    Pastinen & Elin Grundberg

5.  Finnish Red Cross Blood Service, Helsinki, Finland

    Anita Laitinen & Johanna Nystedt

6.  Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Université
    Laval, Québec, Québec, Canada

    Marie-Claude Vohl

7.  Department of Surgery, Children’s Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City,
    MO, USA

    Jason D. Fraser

Authors

1.   Jinchu Vijay
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
2.   Marie-Frédérique Gauthier
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
3.   Rebecca L. Biswell
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
4.   Daniel A. Louiselle
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
5.   Jeffrey J. Johnston
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
6.   Warren A. Cheung
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
7.   Bradley Belden
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
8.   Albena Pramatarova
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
9.   Laurent Biertho
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
10.  Margaret Gibson
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
11.  Marie-Michelle Simon
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
12.  Haig Djambazian
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
13.  Alfredo Staffa
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
14.  Guillaume Bourque
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
15.  Anita Laitinen
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
16.  Johanna Nystedt
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
17.  Marie-Claude Vohl
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
18.  Jason D. Fraser
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
19.  Tomi Pastinen
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
20.  André Tchernof
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar
21.  Elin Grundberg
    View author publications

    You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar

Contributions

E.G. conceived the study. E.G., A.T., T.P. and M.-C.V. designed
experiments. A.T., J.D.F. and M.-F.G prepared or provided the clinical
samples. L.B. and B.B. managed the clinical aspects of the study. A.P.,
R.L.B., M.G., D.A.L. and M.-M.S performed the experiments. W.A.C,
J.J.J., H.D., A.S. and G.B. provided bioinformatics support. A.L and
J.N. provided the MSC cell lines and culture protocols. J.V. and E.G.
analysed the data and drafted the manuscript. All authors reviewed and
contributed feedback on the final manuscript.

Corresponding authors

Correspondence to André Tchernof or Elin Grundberg .

Ethics declarations

Competing interests

A.T. receives funding from Johnson & Johnson Medical Companies and
Medtronic for research unrelated to the present manuscript. The other
authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information

Editor recognition Primary handling editor: Elena Bellafante.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Extended data

Extended Data Fig. 1 Multiple macrophage clusters were identified in SVF from both SAT and VAT depots.

Multiple macrophage clusters were identified in SVF from both SAT and
VAT depots (a) 4 distinct macrophage clusters showing varying expression
of CD68 (19–52% of cells), CD9 (10–51% of cells) and CD36 (25–72% of
cells). The y axis of the violin plot indicate log transformed
expression values and the width indicate number of cells expressing the
particular gene. (b)Genes involves in lipid metabolism is found
expressed in macrophage cluster – IS2, whereas IS3 is rich in
inflammatory markers.

Extended Data Fig. 2 Gene expression of marker genes in 6 visceral specific progenitor clusters.

Gene expression of marker genes in 6 visceral specific progenitor
clusters. The y axis of the violin plot indicate log transformed
expression values and the width indicate number of cells expressing the
particular gene.

Supplementary information

Supplementary Information

Supplementary Figures 1–7

Reporting Summary

Supplementary Tables

Supplementary Tables 1–23

Supplementary Data

Statistical source data for Supplementary Figure 6

Source data

Source Data Fig. 3

Statistical source data for Figure 3c

Source Data Fig. 5

Statistical source data for Figure 5d and 5f

Source Data Fig. 6

Statistical source data for Figure 6d

Rights and permissions

Reprints and permissions

About this article

[Check for updates. Verify currency and authenticity via CrossMark]

Cite this article

Vijay, J., Gauthier, MF., Biswell, R.L. et al. Single-cell analysis of
human adipose tissue identifies depot- and disease-specific cell types.
Nat Metab 2 , 97–109 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-019-0152-6

Download citation []

-   Received : 08 March 2019

-   Accepted : 13 November 2019

-   Published : 23 December 2019

-   Issue Date : January 2020

-   DOI : https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-019-0152-6

Share this article

Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this
content:

Get shareable link

Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.

Copy to clipboard

Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative

Subjects

-   Adipocytes
-   Gene expression
-   Obesity
-   RNA sequencing

This article is cited by

-   Single-cell RNA sequencing in donor and end-stage heart failure patients identifies NLRP3 as a therapeutic target for arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy

    -   Mengxia Fu
    -   Xiumeng Hua
    -   Jiangping Song

    BMC Medicine (2024)

-   Dissecting human adipose tissue heterogeneity using single‐cell omics technologies

    -   Giuliana Di Rocco
    -   Angelo Trivisonno
    -   Gabriele Toietta

    Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2024)

-   Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 marks distinct subtypes of human adipose stromal/stem cells with different hepatocyte differentiation and immunoregulatory properties

    -   Yu Zhang
    -   Mingxi Hua
    -   Haiyan Zhang

    Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2024)

-   PDGFRβ + cell HIF2α is dispensable for white adipose tissue metabolic remodeling and hepatic lipid accumulation in obese mice

    -   Tao Yao
    -   Danni Wei
    -   Ying Wu

    Lipids in Health and Disease (2024)

-   Macrophage and T cell networks in adipose tissue

    -   Ramiah D. Jacks
    -   Carey N. Lumeng

    Nature Reviews Endocrinology (2024)
